” By this, Lorusso examines the startup company ethic that preaches an atmosphere of success and the complicated relationship between failure and success in a creative, professional environment.
The project highlights the social pressures associated within “democratic success” models of crowdfunding “Failure is deemed natural, as long as it is someone else’s failure.
” Thinking about the role of failure within the creative process allows us not only to reflect on the process itself but also to help us reexamine our relationship with money, and project funding in particular.
Kickended seeks to reflect on the “dictatorship of optimism.
 He invites the public to reassess the commonly held idea that a lack of financing equals moral and material failure.
 Through this, he creates an alternative approach to the otherwise taunting notion of failing.
 Apart from the subtle title of the website, the word “failure” is not mentioned anywhere on the website.
Lorusso’s project takes an innovative stance on the concept of failure.
 He describes his collection of failed Kickstarter campaigns as something “funny and sad at the same time”.
 The Kickended project, a Kickstarter clone consisting of Kickstarter campaigns that collected zero dollars, he creates an exposé of the influence of money in relation to our understanding of success.
 Kickended brings a new dimension to the definition of failure.
By Anissa Jousset Artist, designer, and researcher Silvio Lorusso presented his project Kickended during the panel on Artistic Interventions in Finance.
 The “mechanical looking plant” attracts humans in order to attract bitcoin donations, which in turn allow it to reproduce its own being, making it the first autonomous digital artwork, distributer and dealer.
The Plantoid indicates how cryptrocurrencies and decentralized autonomous agents can potentially disrupt economies such as the fine art market.
 The Plantoid, beyond its aesthetics represents a possible new economic system for the artworld that would be open to decentralized, rather than a hierarchical organization.
Beyond being a combination of aesthetics and computer technology, Plantoid represents an alternative model for the art world, in which cryptrocurrencies and decentralized contracts such as ethereum can produce and distribute autonomous artworks.
 The Plantoid is a material realization of the properties of blockchain and portrays the self-sufficient existence of decentralized autonomous agent.
 Plantoid is a mechanical sculpture that grows according to bitcoin donations which then allows it to reproduce according to its own de-centralized resources.
De Filippi was the second speaker during the panel on Blockchain: revolution or business as usual? During her talk Blockchain: Technology as a Distributed Governance Tool she presented her most recent research, inspired by the work of art Planetoid (2015) by the French collective Okhaos.
 Most of her research focuses on the legal challenges raised, and faced by emergent decentralized technologies —such as Bitcoin, Ethereum and other blockchain-based applications —and how these technologies could be used to design new governance models capable of supporting large-scale decentralized collaboration and more participatory decision-making.
 She is faculty associate at the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law School, where she is investigating the concept of “governance-by-design” as it relates to online distributed architectures.
”Primavera De Filippi is a researcher at the National Center of Scientific Research (CNRS) in Paris.
By Anissa Jousset“The modern way in which artists are collaborating and producing is actually going against the traditional conception of copyright.
 After all he is an artist and not a businessman.
 Scott closes of with the notion that some of the further projects of EquityBot could be to involve real money, everybody could invest 20 euro and enjoy the profits.
 It comes as no surprise that Scott firmly believes that artists can make stock trading algorithms that out perform the financial sector.
 Sometimes people ask him ‘how is EquityBot doing’? Scott smiles and says that the answer is really really well, about 18% which is over double what the average stock investor receives per annum (7%).
” (Kildall, 2015)Unlike thousands of investment management firms everybody is able to see what EquityBot is doing.
 So there seems to be some push pull between image, model and reality.
 So for Equitybot I saw emotions as common currency, we all feel them and the stock market does response to emotions in some way and the stock market knows about rationales.
 Ironically or strangely enough this is the point were an artist can come in and do the same thing.
 Stock market investors are seen as musicians, as mystics with some secret intuition of power that we do not have.
“This is whereas my place as an artist comes in.
Moreover, the project retains its artistic agency because there is nothing being sold; it is monitoring and circulating emotional data into stock market shares and capital.
 Scott himself sees it as a ‘conceptual project that appropriates the system of finance and uses its mechanisms to explore language and emotional states’.
 What does that say about professional managed accounts? Not surprisingly, Scott is often confronted with the notion that EquityBot does not seem like an art project, but an innovative stock-trading algorithm.
 EquityBot makes direct correlations between the feelings of twitter users and the shares of multi national corporations.
 Boldly, the algorithm ‘buys’ and ‘sells’ based on the emotions of twitter users highlighting the human emotions behind high frequency trading.
 Equitybot then correlates the rise and fall of certain feelings with the rise and fall of shares of some of the biggest trading companies on the stock exchange.
 Equitybot monitors emotions by using sentiment analysis on twitter, emotions – such as anger, joy, amazement – are turned into data visualizations.
 At MoneyLab#2 he presents his project EquityBot, an automated stock-trading algorithm that uses emotions on Twitter as the basis for investments in a simulated bank account (for more info click here).
 On his website Scott Kildall describes himself as a cross-disciplinary artist who writes algorithms that transform various datasets into 3D sculptures and installations.
By Dominique Verschragen
And as an artist, Scott Kildall emphasizes that everything is tradable, even human feelings.
Reacting to a question in the follow-up discussion, Rothenberg attested that her installations don’t aim to show the beauty of donating but really aim at disrupting the flow of data visualization of these phenomena on the one hand, whilst at the other criticizing the economy responsible of these flows.
 It shows that philanthropy as consumption challenges the boundary between altruism and hedonism, making it indistinguishable if the donation was made for the other or for the image of the self.
 With this project she raises questions about the nature of the transaction itself.
 These statements about the nature of donating literally water the plant.
 It is entitled Planthropy, and entails a growing plant which scrapes the internet for philanthropic statements given either in tweets or in the “why I donate” section of market-philanthropic platforms.
Rothenberg then advanced to another part of her Reversal of Fortune installations.
 The financial intermediaries and credit-givers are often banks which reside in the US, showing that ultimately the flow of money is passing through the developing countries only to go back to developed countries, whilst being polished by evoking the image of watering the Global South.
 Kiva is a credit platform.
 Her mapping of the flows of marketed philanthropy is consequently only ironically a reversal of fortune for the poor.
 Philanthropy and consumption on platforms like Kiva are intertwined in a way that they are made indistinguishable.
In her talk Stephanie Rothenberg made clear that she sees these platforms as uncanny meeting points of a variety of spheres: the global poor meets the like-culture, meets philanthropy, meets marketization.
 But mind the symbols: drawing upon many of the donation based program’s symbols and iconography – such as Kiva’s plant – Rothenberg takes this the plant and embeds it into her artwork.
 The result appears as a reversal of fortune in itself: the developing countries are watered well, with plants growing out of the pots that represent them, whilst the Global West of developed countries remains completely barren.
 If a donation on kiva is made, Reversal of Fortune: Garden of Virtual Kinship waters the plants that represent the country’s destination of that specific donation on a plant-map.
 This platform tries to get rid of intermediaries when donating to developing regions, though forming an intermediary by itself.
 The plants are watered based on the actions that are taken on a micro-credit platform called Kiva.
 Reversal of Fortune: Garden of Virtual Kinship arranges plants in the formation of the map of the worlds continents.
 In her installations, Rothenberg visualizes the traces and the destinations of actions of what is labelled to be a ‘reversal of fortune’.
  ‘Fortune’ designates both one’s destiny as well as one’s financial capabilities.
By Felix Clasbrummel“What does it mean to be philantropic by the click of a button?” Reversal of Fortune is the name of American artist Stephanie Rothenberg’s series of art-installations, which she presented during the panel on Artistic Interventions in Finance at MoneyLab#2.
 Is blockchain technology a (technical) solution looking for a (commercial) problem? What if something goes wrong with the blockchain? And how can the blockchain be deployed at a large scale and be sustainable both commercial and environmentally?Blockchain technology origins1979    Ralph Merkle – Merkle tree for a digital signature1981    Leslie Lamport – hash chain for secure login1991    David Chaum – e-Cash, electronic cash for payments, the first crypto currency1994    S/Key Unix login application with one-time passwords using hash chain1995    Thorben Petterson – electronic payments with a hash chainChris Stanform & Eduard de Jong – n-Count a hash chain for electronic cashRon Rivest & Adi Shamir – PayWord a hash chain for electronic payments2007    Satoshi Nakamoto Bitcoin – crypto currency with Merkle tree and hash chain .
After this brief history of the blockchain, Eduard de Jong concludes with some questions for the panel.
 It takes more than ten years before Bitcoin is introduced by Satoshi Nakamoto, who brings us back to the blockchain.
 Money is somehow out of fashion.
 Interestingly enough, it gets very silent after 1995, states Eduard de Jong.
 In 1994 the idea of Leslie Lamport was integrated to develop the S/Key.
 With E-Cash, the payment could not be changed anymore by the receiver.
The first crypto currency E-Cash was developed by David Chaum in 1991.
 In the blockchain, the hash functions are organised into a tree, which makes it easier to trace a result, while less data and computation are needed.
 The hash chain itself can’t detect this, but the human observer is able read it.
 When something strange happens, one can easily detect the error.
 This way one can trace back a statement that is incompatible with the position in the chain.
 One can add more input, and since it is a chain, one can go back in time.
 These things are then presented together.
 This way, one can record things that are related in time to each other, but one can add some extra information, such as a binary clock, a computation or a text.
 These hash functions can be linked together into a chain, in order for a function to feed into the next.
 It’s a method to produce many one-time keys from a single key or password.
De Jong explains that a hash chain is the successive application of a cryptographic hash function to a piece of data.
 In 1981 Leslie Lamport developed the ‘chain’ part of the blockchain, the hash chain.
 In 1979 Ralph Merkle developed the ‘Merkle Tree’ for digital signature, which is the tree for the ‘block’ part of the blockchain.
 To create a common ground of knowledge about the blockchain, de Jong explained the audience about the origins of blockchain technology, dating back to the seventies.
 The session with presentations by Primavera de Filippi, David Golumbia and Bruce Pon was introduced by computer scientist, inventor and entrepreneur Eduard de Jong.
By Katía TruijenMoneyLab #2 kicked off with a critical discussion about the blockchain.
 After a few moments of transmission, she states that the telepathic receipt-giving process is still in research mode, therefore audience members may expect delays: it will take somewhere between one second up to one year to receive a full visualization of the receipt.
 As a document confirming our viewing of her presentation, Croitoru telepathically delivered a receipt to all audience members who agreed to receive one.
 Rather than any material form to record a transaction, the future may rely on the connection between human minds to transfer contracts.
 The Institute currently works on a new experiment: telepathic receipts.

She continued by explaining that the Immaterial Institute of Research and Experimentation investigates receipts and their abilities to document a transaction.
 Croitoru explains that the downside of thermal printing is that it functions on heat rather than ink and will fade over time by exposure to light.
 The final solidification process puts the receipt into a metastable state.
 Throughout the printing process, Croitoru explains each step in detail with exaggerated hand motions, enlarging and magnifying the small-scale process of thermal receipt printing to the scale of the entire auditorium.
 The circuit path then brings the paper to the cooling vents, located at the beamers on the ceiling of the auditorium.
 Paper runs through the space, at which point heat is applied by another process enacted by a thermal unit.
Croitoru took us on an imaginary tour through a printer describing the mechanical processes of a thermal printer.
 Documentation of these experiments is translated to digital tours, as in the virtual reality of websites, or in paper tours, as in published zines or booklets, and for this presentation the audience would be given a tour through a thermal printer.
 She then expressed that the collective is immaterial, and their main productions are expeditions through space.
 By looking at different methods of recording transactions that developed throughout time, the research collective investigates the history of documenting financial transactions.
 In her performance piece, she took the stage as representative of the Immaterial Institute of Research and Experimentation.
by Delaney ClarkThe fourth presenter of the Artistic Interventions in Finance panel was Raluca Croitoru.
 She designed the MoneyLab#2: Economies of Dissent visual identity.
Her work aims to propose tools to navigate, deconstruct and reflect on modern economical structures, linking immaterial flows of capital back to geographies, jurisdictions, nationhood and material objects.
 As a part of her ongoing project “The All Infrared Line”, artist actually follows the spaghetti of submarine data cables, looking for places where this global infrastructure can be traced and documented.
 In order to demystify the immaterial state of finance, Femke often tracks the physical backbone of technology, that makes high-frequency trading and stock market possible to operate.
Herregraven interprets finance as a construct; she seeks to materialize it and bring it back to general public in a more accessible way.
 Users can understand the dynamics of tax law through an aesthetically pleasing gaming interface and direct interaction, instead of having to go through volumes of tax law documentation.
 The game is based on real data on international capital flows, such as national tax treaties.
 One of her projects, an online game Taxodus:Mapping Assets Offshore, allows users to act within the sphere of offshore accounts and dodge paying taxes on behalf on multinational companies.
 To communicate her findings to a broader audience, she created “a tool for herself and other to see and understand how these structures work’”.
” Wondering where the material side of offshore mechanisms begins, she decided to dive into the tax law and begin her own investigation into invisible structures, routes and pathways.
Herregraven believes that today we often see finance as an intangible, ‘ungraspable’ matter, “distributed through space and time.
 Carrying abstract names such as “Alfa-1” or “Omega-14”, they became an inspiration and a basis for Femke’s project “Geographies of Avoidance”: a book of thousand pages, listing all the invisible companies that can be found in the Zuidas financial district.
 During her time as an artist in residence in the Amsterdam financial district, she discovered that her neighbors were mainly ghost mailbox companies, registered in Netherlands as a part of tax evasion mechanism.
By Anissa Jousset & Anastasia KubrakFemke Herregraven’s work draws its inspiration from the domains of geopolitics and global finance.
After all, capitalism without the commons wouldn’t even have the ability to exist.
 And he might just get it right.
 Jip created his model as an alternative solution for those of us, who are ready to trust each other.
 Economies built on high trust, such as Swedish, prove to be a reliable model.
 Credits can also be based on “community-backed collateral”, and there’s more to come.
What about the future? CommonEasy has economical potential to scale, and to insure risks that haven’t been covered before due to the lack of control, from water supply to cats.
 Also, there is a general lack of culture and interest for commons in societies.
 “We need to compete with similar projects backed up with venture capital”, says Jip, proposing a hybrid model as a solution.
 He also has taken in consideration the main challenges that are awaiting CommonEasy.
 What if someone in our group is extremely clumsy, and we don’t want to pay for him? Should we link our social media accounts to our risks? Can we trust avatars?Luckily, Jip loves questions.
During Q&A, the atmosphere in the room was almost explosive: the audience was eager to learn every detail about functionality and the moral implications of the model.
  These design principles are built around the concepts of network and collective decision-making.
” Quoting his personal hero Elinor Ostrom, author of 11 Design principles for the commons, Jip defines commons as a way to “allocate resources with community rules”.
 “Solidarity is a common good.
“Markets are not an effective model to organize solidarity”, says Jip.
 And there is no interest involved.
 Users have direct incentive to give more money, as they get more money in return, when they get in trouble.
 Help is based on reciprocity: all members decide how much they agree to pay for others.
 It calculates your insurance based upon friends and family who know you and can account for your responsibility.
The logic of CommonEasy is extremely simple.
 And that’s how it all began.
Inspired by success of Dutch self-insurance group BroodFonds, Jip decided to establish his own group with his brother and a couple of friends to insure their smartphones.
 Market control is expensive, and according to Jip, it is built on multiple dark layers: adverse selection, upcoding, information asymmetry, and general lack of transparency.
 Doctors are forced to adapt to the model of profit.
           Overall, current insurance model is generating a constant conflict of interest.
 Meanwhile, commercial insurance companies take up to a 40% of insurance premium, and generously pay their employees to look for reasons to reject the claims.
While studying economics, Jip discovered that 80% of young self-employed in the Netherlands simply couldn’t afford an illness and income disability insurance.
By Anastasia KubrakJip & Florian de Ridder are young entrepreneurs, determined to disrupt current economic system with their new decentralized peer-to-peer insurance model called CommonEasy.
The question remains: How can the application of illicit capitalist strategies, such as tax avoidance, help realize new social orders for the majority of the population, rather than simply highlight the corruption of a elitist minority? Through working together with other social organizations such as Fair Coop Initative, the actions of artists like Güell & Orta can inform, support and help realize the long-term goals of wider social movements.
 Through circumventing the capitalist system, they create their own social utopias.
However the various artistic interventions presented as part of this panel should not only be seen as an attempt to disrupt power structures, but also as acts of political defiance.
“Art is a pretty disgusting world”concluded participants at the end of the video fragment shown by Orta & Güell near the end of their presentation.
Given this action as a central motif, the artists organized a day of debate with thinkers and experts from a variety of fields: economist and socialist Isidro López, philosophers Montserrat Galcerán and Santiago López Petit, political analyst Rubén Martínez, and activist Eric Duran, also a speaker at MoneyLab#2: Economies of Dissent.
 The speed with which institutions get instrumentalized and exploited by modern economy is one of the major concerns shared among the activist group.
Güell believes that tax evasion can be a good tool for creating  autonomous institutions, independent from the dark world of financial monopolies.
 This company now allows artist to avoid regulations imposed by the state, the European Central Bank or by the International Monetary fund.
 They donated their company and all its profits to a group of European activists who are developing autonomous structures within capitalist system.
On the occasion of being invited to show their work at the Reina Sofia Museum in Madrid the artist duo decided to extend their project by adding a new layer to it: an “Ethical Protocol”.
 The main interest of Güell and Orta is to look at how all these advantages might be used in a political way.
 This legal act and certificate in their hands enables the artists to use all the privileges associated with a company such as: no restrictions of the capital flow, private banking, guaranteed anonymity, protected property, etc.
A” allowed the artists to evade all the taxes related to their profits by taking advantage of the jurisdiction and the loose financial regulations in Spain.
 The newly operating company named “Orta & Güell Contemporary Art S.
 Advised by ESADE lawyers they registered their own company in tax haven.
Güell and Orta decided to start their own company in order to investigate how to avoid paying taxes as artists.
To start their project entitled “The Generated Political Act” the artists visited the ESADE – a prestigious international business school in Barcelona, from which most of the politicians have received their degrees.
 In 2014 he was accused and then found guilty in diversion of public money and tax evasion.
 Next photo shows Princess Elena coming out from a court hall after the trial of her husband – Iñaki Urdangarin.
As a prelude, Orta begins by showing a photo of the Spanish royal family pinging to the members and their royalties.
 The works are part of a series called Replica Analitica which aims to reproduce strategies and structures deployed by capitalism in order to analyze, expose and use them to empower individuals — forming a new, anti-capitalist society.
Barcelona-based artists Núria Güell (ES) and Levi Orta (CU) presented two of their works: “Arte Político Degenerado“ (2014) and “Arte Político Degenerado Protocolo ético”(2014).
 With this, the question of how to identify a reliable partner on a crowdfunding platform should be less of a concern.
 This platform had removed boundaries of investment (maximized cross- and international payment options) and maximized the possibility of interaction, both giving the funders the feeling of connectedness and being-withness, as well as the founders the possibility to build a sustainable crowd.
The discussion was eventually drawn towards the imagination of an ideal platform.
 All in all, the different strands of the campaign have to result in an image that is both transparent and predictable to successfully gain trust.
 occasional near real-time updates increase the felt presence of a founder and consequently tighten the bonds between the founders and backers.
 Van Boeschoten mentioned that e.
 Being visible in the campaigns video might be one strategy, but frequent updates of the campaign which provide insight into the development were identified as being more effective.
 One of the most crucial points of the negotiation of trust though is the felt presence of the respective founders.
 previously started campaigns) context.
 Platforms have to be made up and used as to embed other social platforms to give the avatar a social and historic (e.
 Its anonymity might make it difficult to evoke trust in a potential backer or business partner.
A classic hindrance to building trust is the avatar identity that one adapts when starting a campaign on a crowdfunding platform.
 Be it the design, be it the amount of friends that back it, be it the tone of the video – the authenticity of the founders engagement needs to be felt real and present through all of this.
 The result: trust is negotiated through nearly every element of a campaign.
Backed by van Boeschoten’s insights of his research about this topic, the issue of negotiating trust was then re-enacted, both from a founders as well as from a funders perspective.
 Not only does a potential funder need to trust the campaign of interest, but the founders themselves need to trust the platform to provide the right tools to develop a successful campaign.
 Being an important but complicated factor to produce, trust is often a key factor for success for campaigns on crowdfunding platforms, but as well for the success of the platforms themselves.
 In this editions workshop, van Boeschoten took engagement with Crowdfunding platforms one step further and dealt with the problem of negotiating trust on these platforms.
 During the MoneyLab’s first edition, he presented his Crowdfunding Toolkit (which you still can find on the INC’s website), a useful tool for aspiring crowd-founders to identify the right platform for their campaign (though van Boeschoten admitted it would need to change from a static to a dynamic tool).
By Felix ClasbrummelRobert van Boeschoten, researcher and lecturer at Hogeschool van Amsterdam and Universiteit voor Humanistiek, was in for his second round at the MoneyLab.
”David Golumbia tweets under @dgolumbia.
 […] If there is a sort of policy-takeaway from the position in developing then it is probably that Blockchain needs to be heavily regulated.
 This, as he stresses, is often neglected when said technologies are being promoted: “We should all be asking whether it is good to be building these technologies at all.
 Pointing to the documentary “All Watched over by Machines of Loving Grace”, Golumbia reminded the  audience of the problems of decentralised organisation: That it makes it not only possible but in most of the times very easy for criminal forces to follow whichever trail they want.
 He clearly refuses to take for granted that if the words “decentral” and “autonomous” are voiced, the related technology automatically enters a safe space of uncritical action.
” Alluring to mass-surveillance and involvement of algorithms in military conflicts, Golumbia, who writes about related subjects on his personal blog uncomputing, made clear why he ponders upon strengthened critical undertakings when it comes to technologies.
Golumbia criticized Blockchain’s possibility to execute complete autonomous algorithms: “think about that carefully what that means: anything that can be done by a computational process, and it cannot be controlled.
  A new elite.
 Here, a technically decentralised network meets a centralised organization of its maintenance.
 This holds especially true for Bitcoin and the Blockchain, which processes of both distribution and production (mining) have been centralised to a degree that it became inaccessible to “normal people”.
 Only because something is technologically decentralised, it doesn’t automatically result in a decentralised political structure.
 The most frequent error Golumbia identified is to mistake a technological infrastructure for a social one.
 The effects of these technologies are mostly viewed as positive, whilst at the same time absolutely lacking to undergo a critical analysis to determine “if they actually are”.
Golumbia pointed out the uncritical undertone of welcome change that is introduced to the world by technologies like Bitcoin and the Blockchain.
 Only because something is designed in a certain manner, it doesn’t mean it has to be accepted as such.
 This contradiction in promoted effect and actual effect might, if it goes on uncritically, in the end be very dangerous.
 Being promoted with words like “open, transparent and democratized”, the designated technologies could at the same time well advance the very opposite.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bitcoin and the Blockchain, in his opinion, are the most poignant examples of this phenomenon of disrupting the makeup of contemporary society in a way that it is endangering and penetrating the discourse of the political left.
 Introducing himself as a political-philosopher and a conceptual thinker Golumbia voiced the danger that technology has the tendency to displace the always needed (self-)criticism to find its right place and function in a global society.
By Felix Clasbrummel The closing note of the Blockchain: Revolution or Business as Usual panel given by David Golumbia served both as a meta-commentary and a critical reminder to the panels’ topic.
 In that respect, MoneyLab already offers some interesting examples, O’Dwyer states.
 Maybe we should recognize the imperfection of money, but try to work with this imperfection and include and acknowledge the social side.
She concludes that the problems that we face in developing alternatives may be inherent to money as a technology, or at least to particular approaches, such as the trustless economy.
”According to O’Dwyer, peer-to-peer is an important guiding principle, but also game theory offered a glimpse of what is possible.
 The blockchain could provide the infrastructure to reproduce the commons, which allows apps to scale beyond small-scale idealistic products.
 “We can use the database for other kinds of transactions.
”Instead, O’Dwyer claims, the challenge is to reproduce the model of the commons.
 They are designed not to replace, but to embody liberal economy.
 In that sense, one could ask whether these alternatives should actually be considered as alternatives at all.
 Should we reproduce an economic logic it is claiming to work against?”O’Dwyer continues: “Although we are trying to find alternatives for managing our resources, we still operate from the perspective of the (self interest of the) homo economicus.
 This brings up neoliberal questions.
 The problem is that when we design alternatives, we are often reproducing the values of economic systems.
 We delegate trust in the community to algorithms.
 The blockchain is persistent and verifyable; it is very difficult for a hacker to hack it.
 “The blockchain creates the possibility of trustless trust, while it doesn’t need a centralized intermediary.
”Rachel O’Dwyer recognizes the innovation of the blockchain, but she would be interested to see how we can use the technology to create real alternatives.
 “Although there is a lot of discussion about monetary reform, problems are always solved by using technology; if there is a problem, there must be an app for it.
 However, O’Dwyer states that there is a lack of politics in the development of these alternative economies or algorithmic currencies.
Alongside the financial crisis, alternative infrastructures have been developed, based on algorithms for matching needs, for indexing trust and social capital or for establishing consensus in the absence of social institutions.
 This infrastructure can be scaled into social or national institutions and authorities, like banks or platforms.
 The rail, or the infrastructure, supports the flow of information, and is by definition a social infrastructure build on trust.
O’Dwyer recalls the presentation of Bill Maurer during the first edition of MoneyLab about money as both the token and the rail.
 This system is then supported by an infrastructure.
 In fact, money is a complex system of social relations.
 By adding a surplus in the present, one can profit from it later.
 In fact, value has always been ‘stored’ in many ways; in money or metal, or in good will and social relationships.
 Rachel O’Dwyer refers to the book Debt: the first 5000 years by anthropologist David Graeber, in which he explains the origins of the gift economy and the ways in which we have been storing value.
Money can be understood as a technology that allows forms of exchange beyond social relations.
 In her presentation at MoneyLab, she raised the question what kind of sociality we are engineering into our alternative monetary systems.
 Her research areas include mobile communications and radio spectrum, open networks and alternative currencies.
By Katía TruijenRachel O’Dwyer writes about the political economy of communications, the digital commons and new media cultures.
Thank you for your interest in DullTech™.
 And while exploring the idea of “dull technology with self aware references”, DullTech is currently developing a new series of products that will make our lives even easier.
This project embraces comparison between art and business, raising a question if it has become a norm that artistic work is valid only when appreciated in a capitalist environment.
 The speculation became reality, and a critique of finance actually got fundraised.
 Their Kickstarter campaign actually got funded.
 DullTech™ actually produced their product with the help of Chinese factory workers.
 It raises questions on modes of factory production, market economy by fully deploying its methods and corporate visual language.
Though disturbingly realistic, DullTech™ is a fictional project: it is both an analysis and a critical reflection on efficiency-oriented capitalist society.
 An unbearably long video stresses the urgency of solving the problem and lists thousands of arguments for purchasing the player immediately.
The DullTech team present their purposefully dull, technologically simplified product in a form of generic crowdfunding campaign.
And it would be that simple, if Dulltech™ itself wasn’t a performative artwork.
 “It’s really that simple”.
 DullTech™ media player effortlessly loops and synch videos over multiple screens, for you.
 Mo more stress or drama in making a video installation for an exhibition or an art-fair; no more remote controls or expensive AVI professionals to hire.
By Karina Zavidova & Anastasia KubrakDullTech™ is a hardware startup, dedicated to once and for all solve frustrations that contemporary artists encounter using technology.
What we can learn from criminals is that we should start thinking beyond frontiers, beyond families and beyond nation-states.
 Creative criminal infrastructure is layered across many frontiers, spread over multiple jurisdictions, regardless of ideologies of the states it involves.
 Saying that, Radu and his team don’t believe in local law enforcement: criminals move much faster.
Criminals often become Radu’s sources: after being exposed, they keep in touch and start providing evidence for other crimes.
 Or when the criminals themselves start to respect you.
 Or when one of the countries involved in the scheme actually shuts down its crime chain.
 When a bank that he once exposed is now on sale.
 But it’s all worth it, once you witness the effects of your investigations.
 From hacked mailboxes, legal threats from oligarchs, massive DDOS attacks to actual physical surveillance or imprisonment.
 Even though Smari McCarthy, a famous information activist, gave them a helping hand with cyber security, Radu and his colleagues often face direct consequences of their investigation.
 Compelled to work “on the cheap”, Radu’s team uses accessible encryption services.
Although artists remain safe working with such information, journalists are the ones who can get into real trouble.
 Looking at fellow panelists Femke Herregraven and Paolo Cirio, he tells the audience that artists just like them are needed to build a visual layer on top of dry journalistic data and create an accessible narrative for these stories.
 When it comes to making investigations public, design and visualization also have a crucial impact on how information will be perceived.
”Fascinated by creativity of criminals that he follows, Radu points out that lack of imagination can become a problem for journalists.
 They even publish books.
 “They hold conferences on how to avoid taxes.
 “They have meetings just like this!”, he exclaims, pointing at the MoneyLab stage.
 In fact, says Radu, we should learn from criminals by analyzing their strategies and applying them ourselves.
Creativity behind the design of such platforms should not be underestimated.
 Different organized crime groups from Russia, Moldova or Romania use same “proxy platforms” — systems built on thousands of phantom companies that only exist on paper, and are run by human proxies.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Today, a maze of companies and agents involved in a criminal infrastructure worldwide forms a global “criminal service industry”.
 Radu opened his talk with the presentation of “The Russian Laundromat”: a complex system for laundering more than $20 billion in Russian money stolen from the government, with the involvement of Latvian banks, corrupted Moldovan judges and a cousin of Vladimir Putin.
By Anastasia Kubrak“What we do is simple: we follow money”Paul Radu is an investigative reporter and the executive director of the The Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project.
Full report published here  and slides from the event can be downloaded here.
 The inability to imagine alternative use cases for p2p distributed networks to enable greater financial inclusion, citizen empowerment or civil organization will lead to the inevitable commercialization and privatization of blockchain, and bankers will fondly remember Bitcoin as the greatest gift the hackers ever made.
 By that time I imagine distributed ledger technology will be firmly cemented into the global industry as the potential for networked transaction systems is appropriately fitted to serve the interests of commercial trade.
To help EU Digital Social Innovation Board understand blockchain technology further they have allocated 2 billion EUR over the next 10 years for research and development.
 Interesting confrontations between Jakob von Weizsäcker (member of the European Parliament) and Bitcoin fanatics provided some light entertainment, with Von Weizsäcker concluding, somewhat defensively, ‘you cannot regulate what you don’t understand’.
Instead of dealing with the underlying concerns and original opportunities associated with blockchain, the workshop predominantly consisted of endless examples of blockchain applications and business prototypes that strive to become new players in the de-centralized tech market.
 The outcome of Dyne’s research project is wide and varied and demonstrates attempts to develop alternative expressions of value with DLTs that support communities and non-commercial infrastructures.
 Iceland’s complimentary currency to incentivize political engagement and participatory accounting for the council of Reykjavik is a promising example of de-centralized technology being used for non-commercial citizen based incentives.
org whose EU funded research into re-designing democracy has led to technical prototypes that are being used in political parties and communities across Europe.
It was also fascinating to hear more from Dyne.
), there seems to be little planning or interest into how blockchain and decentralized technologies can actively re-distribute wealth for the long term, rather just pan out as another disruptive technology in the competition for market dominance.
 Although many of the businesses present seem keen to break up platform monopolies (Amazon, Google, etc.
 Brett asked how, if possible, can DLT provide alternative expressions of value that can improve financial inclusion rather than streamline the technical infrastructures of existing financial corporations.
 Brett Scott (The Heretics Guide to Global Finance) wanted to re-frame the interpretation of the ‘blockchain for social good’ title and move towards a discussion on financial inclusion and network monopolies.
Fortunately, there were two presentations in the afternoon that questioned the commercial application of blockchain technology and even offered some more inspiring visions of DLTs in social projects.
 Companies and businesses seem to be the first to seize the benefits of a digital public ledger as an administrative tool for legitimising digital exchange and managing information with de-centralized infrastructures.
 Rather than becoming a tool for self-organised community empowerment, DLTs are quickly being incorporated into verification software and transaction based systems.
 Take for example, the research into DLT by Catherine Mulligan at Imperial College, who have developed a program that uses blockchain to verify qualifications listed on job applications and resumes.
 Generally, the implementation of blockchain in businesses that are capable of adopting the technology is geared towards replacing middle management and intermediaries with autonomous, de-centralized code.
 It was interesting to observe how blockchain technology was maturing into commercial business contexts to actually enforce existing regulatory frameworks rather than create opportunities for self-organized unregulated social structures.
 In the few examples of blockchain technology that were presented during the workshop many seemed to enforce existing regulatory structures with networked computing, such as EU fishing regulations (in the case of provenance.
 This is still in early development but has successfully been applied in the fishing industry to ensure the catch of the day has been caught legally.
org, where products are registered and tracked using blockchain to ensure an equitable supply chain.
 Jessie Baker offered some ‘real world solutions’ rather than just back-end technical fixes for big companies, in the form of provenance.
 There were very few examples of ‘social good’, unless you can interpret social good as lowering logistic costs and increasing profits.
 Matthew Golby-Kirk from IBM presented the Hyperledger a collaborative effort to offer commercial or private scalable versions of blockchain, where p2p values manifest into business-to-business logistics.
 There were advocates from both sides of the blockchain debate, representatives from Visa, Mastercard and IBM sat alongside Bitcoin evangelists such as Pindar Wong from Scaling Bitcoin and Amin Rafiee from Bitnation.
 For many there, this event was an opportunity to gain and understanding of blockchain and apply de-centralized technology into their long term business prospects.
 While De Filippi opened the morning session discussing the potential for DAOs and the implications of smart contract legislation, many of the audience grappled with some unfamiliar concepts and terms in attempt to convert this new wave of disruptive tech into their business logistics.
 So it was somewhat contradictory to hear De Filippi discuss the potential for de-centralized autonomous organisations to contest top down power structures in none other but European Parliament in Brussels – probably the most visible examples of centralized power in the western world.
 Much of this rhetoric has repeatedly been told by Ethereum ambassadors such as Vinay Gupta and Primavera de Filippi (see Promises of the Blockchain).
 

Although DAOs and Ethereum are just one part of a much wider horizon of DLT potential, we should not forget that a lot of the de-centralized socialist storytelling involves smart contracts and DAO technology cutting out intermediaries to empower collective citizen governance.
 The powerful and enchanting rhetoric of blockchain took a severe tumble after Vitalik called for a cease of trading to help stop the ether hack, turning the bright prospect of a de-centralized autonomous market into a gloomy centralized dictatorship.
 Although most speakers were forced to address the DAO scandal and offer short term practical solutions (rolling back Ethereum platform to reverse and cancel previous transactions) nobody was keen to say how badly this ‘bug in the code’ had effected the political values and social credibility of DLT.
 The attempts to professionalize blockchain technology and begin to strategically plan its implementation into European policy were unfortunately slightly tarnished by the calamitous DAO ether hack that had occurred 2 days before.
I was immediately surprised by the imperative taken by EU council to host such an event as it shows that blockchain advocates have clearly kicked up enough of a storm to reach the agenda of European Parliament.
 The room was packed full of entrepreneurs, business people and middle management consultants all demonstrating an interest into blockchain technology, and how they can get to grips with the new technology to turn blockchain into a ‘technology for social good’.
­Report from ‘blockchain for social good‘ workshop at European Commission in June 2016
On 21st June the Digital Single Market Council (a division of EU parliament) invited the full cavalry of blockchain and bitcoin advocates to Brussels to discuss the future of distributed ledger technology (DLT).
 What can the company do to improve safety?” – written by the journalist Zak Stone.
 Find here the story – “Living and Dying on Airbnb: My dad died in an Airbnb rental, and he’s not the only one.
On-Demand Economy: More Regulations and Non-Profit Apps Needed to Build a Fairer Future.
 The problem, at the moment, is that it is in the hands of for-profit companies.
 The technology is marvelous.
 There are already some apps that connect somebody who produces too much food, like a farmer or a restaurant, with people that need food.
 One of them is the creation, by NGOs for example, of non-profit apps that help people in their lives.
LU: Are there other alternatives?SH: There are numerous ways to address this problem.
 In the United States some people are very pro technology and there has been this reluctance to put regulations around these companies but now things are changing.
 There are a lot of rules that need to be really thought through and, sometimes, it takes terrible things happening before we realize we need to address these issues.
 We cannot let them get away with this corporate right.
 The problem is that the service comes before the legal issue.
 You have Airbnb where people get injured, one Uber driver killed a 6 years old girl in San Francisco and Uber tries to say “we are not responsible because this driver does not work for us, he is an independent contractor”.
LU: So regulations and laws constitute a response to this problem?SH: Absolutely.
 Eventually, we are going to get it right but it is taking a lot of trying.
 So far, the efforts made by cities, states and national governments have not been very effective.
 They cannot know if hosts are adhering to the rules, the laws that have been set, and if the company is paying hotel taxes; many companies are refusing to pay taxes at all.
 Without the data from Airbnb – for example – there is no possibility for governments to know whether the sales declared by the company are correct or not.
 However, the regulations they are coming up with are not working well.
LU: How do local governments and states react to this phenomenon?SH: More and more cities are starting to realize that they need to regulate these new services.
 This is the real face of Airbnb, it is not the average person who is renting out a spare room on their own to make extra money.
 In the case of Airbnb, independent studies have found that 40 to 50 per cent of its revenue comes from professional real estate.
 However, both platforms have been taken over by huge financial venture capital interests, mainly interested in extracting the most out of the workers, not caring if they hurt the communities.
 Leila Ueberschlag: What is your position on Airbnb and Uber?Steven Hill: Uber and Airbnb have added a service that people like, we have to acknowledge that there is something good there.
Interview conducted on the second of September at the PeerValue: advancing the commons collaborative economy Conference in Amsterdam.
 His latest books are Expand Social Security Now!: How to Ensure Americans Get the Retirement They Deserve (2016) and Raw Deal: How the “Uber Economy” and Runaway Capitalism Are Screwing American Workers (2015).
Steven Hill is a writer, lecturer and political professional based in the United States with two decades of experience in politics.
Scot concluded the introduction of the panel by saying that with this diverse range of speakers the actual affiliations do not really matter because of they all come together to complement each other.
 He is lecturer at the Institute of Time-Based Media at the University of Arts, Berlin.
 He is the author of “A Political Economy of The Smallest Things”.
 Baruch Gottlieb is a filmmaker who works in the realm of digital arts.
 He is the inventor of the terms ‘copyfarleft’ and ‘venture communism’.
 Dmytri is the author of Telecomunismt Manifesto, a print-on-demand publication by Institute of Network Cultures).
 They are part of Telekommunisten Network – an art collective critically engaged with telecommunication technologies through arts and critical theory.
Last but not least the “troublemakers” Dmytri Kleiner and Baruch Gottlieb, as described by Scott.
 Her research fields include mobile communications and radio spectrum, open networks and alternative currencies, blog chains, cryptocurrencies.
 Rachel occasionally writes about digital media, political economy of communications, and the commons.
 She is a post-doctoral researcher and lecturer in the School of Computer Science in Trinity College Dublin.
 She is also collaborating in the Peer-to-Peer Network Foundation.
 O’Dwer is an editor of an open access, peer reviewed journal named Interference – a journal for Audio Culture.
 She curated a festival called “openhere” – a critical notion of technology, peer productions and open source culture, which has similar vibe to MoneyLab, as pointed out by Scot.
The next speaker is Rachel O’Dwer.
 In this context he will talk about Robin Hood Minor Asset Management project, which was also presented in a workshop at the afternoon session at the MoneyLab#2.
 He mostly works in collaborative group named Reality Research Center where he creates game alike experiences to play with what we understand of reality.
 He specializes in so called whooping the structure of reality.
The second speaker at the conference is Pekko Koskinen.
 Scott recommends an online article on Vice magazine “On the Lam with Bank Robber Enric Duran” written by Nathan Schneider, which tells the story of Eric, how he started building the platform and about his ongoing project named Fair Coop.
 In 2010 he initiated Catalan Integral Cooperative (CIC) – a grass root network of cooperatives, which uses innovative technologies and legal systems in order to create alternative economic system.
 What are the ways to negotiate all these issues ?Brett introduces the first speaker Enric Duran – a political activist best known for his civil disobedience against the banks or more particularly his act of taking loans from 39 banks in Spain and distributing the money to different activist groups, for which he has being prosecuted till present.
 The main questions Scott addresses is how do you blend together economic disruption, which have an impact to the mainstream but lacks a political vision while maintaining some radical impulse or creating a true disruption initiated by smaller groups of individuals.
 On the other hand Brett also works with small scale alternative community currencies which might impact only certain amount of people who completely ignore the mainstream economic system.
 It is really hard and long term process which often involves a lot of compromises pointed by Scott.
 On one hand he is working with large scale organization such as United Nation of Principles for Responsible Investments (UNPRI) an organization that tries to move governments and big investors in the sustainable global financial system or “try to shift the titanic” summed up by Scott.
Scott’s field of research and writing incorporates financial reform and financial activism, which look at different attempts to change the current financial system.
 He starts by introducing himself and the participants of the panel.
By Michaela Lakova Brett Scott is the moderator of this panel on ‘Tactics for Economies of Dissent’.
 “And as I use those witnesses, I start to feel really positive that more and more people are moving towards these much more stable business opportunities.
 “When I see new businesses proposals I ask myself: are they local? Are they reconnecting people to places? Are they restoring value received for value created rather than just money giving for time donated?”, he continued.
 According to him, the closest model for this idea of the digital age can be found in the early dream of cottage industries; far away from these giant and centralized computer driven googleplexes and their massive accumulation of capital.
 “The real goal of this economic movement, of this renaissance, is to restore lands and labours to the backers of production”, commented Douglas Rushkoff.
Similar initiatives can be found here: “11 platform cooperatives creating a real share economy” Digital does enables more distributed means of values creation and gives the people the opportunity of managing a network of smaller businesses.
works (a tool for getting more people involved in collaborative communities), Geeks Without Bounds (an accelerator for humanitarian projects) or beyondcare (a socially responsible cooperative business whose members provide child care services).
 Many other examples of this online participatory culture exist, like Teem.
 As explained on its website, the platform, which is based in New Zealand, is “a sort of DIY social enterprise support network” and “a virtual and physical network of companies and professionals brought together by a set of shared values and passion for positive social impact”.
 “We don’t want to become an online community that is ten times the size we are today”, said Craig Ambrose, developer and entrepreneur at Enspiral.
 Enspiral, a collective social enterprise that makes, uses and distributes free apps for decision making and budgeting, is one example of such a platform.
 The latter are changing the way people run businesses, create value and redistribute the wealth.
 Promisingly, such apps have started to emerge with the (re)introduction of workers’ co-operatives or the creation of platform co-ops.
” For him, more non-profit apps need to be created in order to counterbalance these massive corporations, whose main goal is profit, without concern for the workers or the communities.
 “A perfect example of this system is the platform upwork.
 “Enterprises are using armies of freelancers and workers are not paid for the time they spend on developing a product but only for the final result,” added Hill.
 The reality of the collaborative and sharing economy often goes hand in hand with low and unstable salaries.
 Nowadays, lots of employment contracts are temporary and workers do not have any healthcare insurances.
” In the United Sates, after the dramatic recession that took place in 2008 and 2009, the labor market has changed drastically – which is also true in many other countries.
 According to the author and consultant Steven Hill (full interview available here): “Uber and Airbnb show us what these technologies can do if we do not make it right.
  The situation described by the speakers is more than concerning.
 ”This economic system cannot support the people, nor the planet any longer; some alternatives have to be found,” Rushkoff continued.
“When you get rid of governments but not of corporations, they grow out of control”, said media theorist and best-selling author Douglas Rushkoff, last week at a conference, advancing the commons collaborative economy, organized by P2Pvalue in Amsterdam.
 These dominant network platforms linking sellers and buyers bring new challenges to the field of the so-called collaborative economy and raise serious concern in terms of taxation, job security, healthcare insurance or work compensation.
Airbnb and Uber have recently been standing center stage in the international media theater.
 Tickets for individual sessions will be on sale from September.
19:00 – 23:00 – Fiscal Drag Live featuring Fine Art Finance Lab, The Feminist Economics Department, Tori Abernathy, and University of the Phoenix
Friday 2 December
9:30 – 10:00 – Registration10:00 – 11:15 – Session 4: Big Pocket is Watching You!  featuring Austin Houldsworth, Nathalie Maréchal, Emily Rosamond & Brett Scott,11:15 – 12:30 – Session 5: UBI: For One and for All? featuring Tori Abernathy, Dmytri Kleiner, Johannes Ponader & Patrice Riemens  12:30 – 13:30 – Lunch Break13:30 – 15:00 – Workshops15:00 – 15:30 – Break15:30 – 17:30 – Session 6: Commitment to the Commons featuring Caroline Nevejan, Lewis Just & Trebor Scholz19:00 – 23:00 – Failing Better Afterparty Tickets are on sale now via this link.
1-2 December 2016
Conference : Pakhuis de Zwijger, Amsterdam
Cabaret : Mezrab, Amsterdam
Afterparty : Roest Bar, AmsterdamSchedule
Thursday 1 December9:00 – 9:30 – Registration9:30 – 9:45 – Introduction by Geert Lovink9:45 – 11:15 – Session 1: Global Finance: Failing Better? featuring Virginia Alvarez, Alex Foti, Renzo Martens & Cassie Thornton 11:15 – 12:30 – Session 2: Save The Last Dance featuring Bindu de Knock, Henry Warwick & Koos Zwaan12:30 – 13:30 – Lunch Break13:30 – 15:00 – Workshops15:00 – 15:30 – Break15:30 – 17:30 – Session 3: When Art Mirrors Marx featuring Tori Abernathy, Steyn Bergs, Max Haiven, Jeroen Van Loon & Dan Mihaltianu.
MoneyLab #3 Failing Better 
A two day symposium of talks, workshops, performances and parties that conquer the assumption that anything is too big too fail.
 Supporting the struggles to win these needs will help workers get what they need to produce, in order to allow for a revolutionary workers movement.
 Gottlieb finishes the presentation on a very hopeful note, suggesting that by confronting the existing social institutions, the protection of the social conditions of health, housing, food and water supply, education, childcare, may be achieved.
 Many other topics and historical references are mentioned in the talk, such as the CompuServe age of centralized platforms, cargo cults and their false image, the bloody background of technology, and a Leninist trajectory of politics.
Tactics of technological disobedience will allow for greater appropriations of value from the end of the production chain, and counterantidisintermediationist practices will disrupt the monopoly of web platforms, thus protecting venture communism as falling into the capitalist trap.
 Kleiner then mentions that these guidelines are suggested as ways in which to avoid the development of hierarchical structures between various co-ops and the possibility of turning into a unequal organization after gaining too much power or activity.
A venture communist is cooperative and owned equally by all, federated through the ownership of many co-op members, commons based, and open to all workers.
 He then acknowledges the question of how a venture commune initially acquires property, and details a commons bonds process as a solution.
 Insurgent finance and transvestment are the active forces searching for ways to divert values between the classes by imposing a balancing act between investment and exvestment.
Kleiner expresses the economic infrastructure for venture communism by defining the macroeconomic concept of transvestment.
 He informs the audience that counterantidisintermediation and technological disobedience are the key intellectual strategies to sustain venture communism practices.
 Reclaiming the potential of used materials is a necessary objective for venture communism because it fights the violent roots of technology and subverts the product lifecycle.
Gottlieb discusses technological disobedience as the disruption of the regular streamlined capital of the technology market by hacking, modding, or recycling devices and software.
 Counterantidisintermediation technologies are a necessity to maintain venture communism’s stance against capitalism and function by relocating computer systems to the endnotes rather than the centralized intermediary systems.
” The early utopian vision of the internet was destroyed by the centralization of computer processes, which resulted in powerful money and energy hunger entities.
Kleiner begins the talk by defining the key term “counterantidisintermediation.
 This dense presentation discusses venture communism, an organizational form for workers struggle that exists to expand political economy within the dominating capitalist society.
One of the first slides from the presentation displayed lengthy words that require a second glance: technological disobedience, transvestment, and counterantidisintermediation were the colorful words that loomed over the rest of the presentation.
 Through critiques of communication systems, the group’s art practices develops alternative platforms and programs to subvert centralized and hierarchical structures of society.
By Delaney ClarkDmitry Kleiner and Baruch Gottlieb from the Telekommunisten art group based in Berlin joined us Friday afternoon  for the Tactics for Economic Dissent session.
 His presence at the MoneyLab brought a valuable insight on interventionism in media art, questioning the vulnerability of social, economical, legal and technological structures in contemporary society.
”Paulo Cirio’s artworks give us a glimpse of urgent topics under the fields of finance and economics, but most importantly, enable public discourse.
 “Not really” claimed Paulo Cirio, “but these places have been doing these things for so long, and no one really knows whats going on.
“Do you want to change the world?”, someone asked from the audience.
” Since the artist is Italian his personal identity is safe.
 All the data has also been transferred to California because of privacy issues.
 “I made a scheme to avoid legal prosecution; to run this project I set up an account in London, and used PayPal in Luxembourg.

In four easy steps anyone can hijack a company in the Cayman Islands, a corporate provocation that elicited reactions raging from local businesses to multinational companies, as well as Cayman authorities, international law firms and accounting firms such as PayPal.
com not only reveals this information but also promotes the sale of the real identities of anonymous Cayman companies at low cost prices (= 99 cents).
 The website loophole4all.
000 Cayman Islands companies that practice tax evasion, hide money and debt.
 Loophole 4 published a list of 200.
The second project its an investigation on offshore financial systems.
” Only the Financial Times along with some of the publishing companies involved didn’t agree with the statement, having sent a legal letter that made the project shut down, after five days of online existence and 1000 copies freely distributed all over New York City.
Whilst leaving the official publishers out of the circle, Cirio presented a new circular and provocative economic business model, that opened access to information on global economic matters: “A very useful tool for investigation and knowledge in economy.
 Simultaneously the online platform also allowed for donations to writers and journalists which were then able to claim compensation for there work.
For the sake of financial literacy and general public awareness, the artist then proposed to pay people to read the featured articles and for the reader to answer correctly a set of questions part of a quiz.
 By accessing the content of the journal through a paid subscription and a scripting language hack, Cirio gathered an enormous database of financial news which were then re-published and made available for free on his own page: dailypaywall.
 The Daily Paywall is an assemblage of over 60,000 pay-per-view articles from the Financial Times, The Wall Street Journal and The Economist, published during the year of 2014.
The first project concerns the value of information and its distribution, bringing its dark side to light.
”For the MoneyLab symposium Cirio presented two projects that are part of his work on economic and financial system: The Daily Paywall and The Loophole for All.
 A layer of artistic scenario is good for getting the audience to engage, but you should provide an informative artwork, and not merely speculative one.
 While combining his research with a hybrid artistic scenery, he sees in art a channel for reliable communication and a new form of perceiving reality: “I’m against faking data, you don’t want to lose the audience’s trust.
 He investigates fields related to copyright, privacy, finance democracy and cyber-security, which then take the shape of multimedia installations, performance, or interventions.
 His work is essentially building on a critical theory of information power and how that impacts the dynamics of social structures among individuals, governments and corporations.
By Joana ChicauPaolo Cirio is an Italian conceptual artist and hacktivist.
 “Art doesn’t have to be instrumental in a way that it exposes our financial systems, but it may allow us to relate to the invisible world of finance, through objects that tell a particular story.
 According to Herregraven, these sticks may be absurd objects, but they can help us to think about possible (material) dimensions of our trading systems.
 Her work Rogue Waves, refers back to the tally stick, an ancient mnemonic device to record and document numbers and quantities.
 The more invisible and immaterial financial processes become, the larger its material base.
 Could we for example take an algorithm to court?”In fact, the abstract ‘immaterial’ world of finance is based on an immense material world, Herregraven explains.
 The question is how to go beyond the sublime of the financial world.
 These metaphors seem to confirm that we don’t control or understand these systems.
 “Conceptual metaphors such as earthquakes are used to describe financial processes.
 “This is the terror of the financial sublime”, Femke Herregraven explains.
”At the same time, companies and financial institutions do anything they can to keep the mystery of the financial world in place.
 Now that more information is available, it’s important that people are able to actually engage with this information.
 Even if we knew before that countries like Switzerland were operating in this way, we couldn’t do much because we lacked sufficient information.
 “The first book and investigation about offshore financial centers was only published a couple of years ago.
 According to Paolo Cirio, artistic scenarios may help people to engage with data and abstract finance systems.
”
The audience is interested to hear from the panel about their role as artists in working with the abstract world of finance.
 They also publish books about personal criminal stories to share strategies.
 “These meetings focus on how to hide money or how to avoid paying taxes.
” In fact, criminals organize meetings quite similar to the MoneyLab conference, Radu states.
 They think beyond the borders of the nation state, and they don’t care about family or differences in gender.
 In this respect, one can compare these criminal networks with the world of science.
 “They don’t care about frontiers.
 Criminal organizations act much faster than any other organization.
According to Paul Radu, we shouldn’t forget that a lot can be learned from criminals in terms of how to organize ourselves.
 Or – once the name of a company has been removed – employees explain that they love his work, but that they don’t have the agency to address issues like corruption.
 Sometimes Cirio receives surprising reactions of people who are simply curious to know how he managed to obtain a particular document from their company.
 There have also been legal threats, by high frequency traders, small and major companies and the Cayman Islands.
 Mostly people approach him informally by email, to ask if he can remove the name of their company from his work.
Paolo Cirio is confronted with different types of consequences.
” Radu explains that sometimes (former) criminals become sources for the OCCRP after their wrongdoings are exposed in reports.
 Still, our main defense is that we never touch personal lives in our reports; we always try to create a dialogue.
 However, in some situations we need bulletproof vests as well.
 We often use our grants to cover cyber security.
“In fact”, Radu states, “we would need the level of security that is only available to CEO’s, but we try to secure ourselves as cheap as possible with PGP and crypto phones.
 The team uses cell phones with double authentication, but cell phones are still being spoofed and people have hacked their Gmail accounts.
 His team has not only been subjected by digital surveillance, but also by physical surveillance, as members have been followed and have been spied on.
Paul Radu explains that he has experienced real threats because of his work for the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP).
 She is curious to hear more about the kind of consequences that the speakers are confronted with, because of the sensitive material that they engage with in their work, and how they deal with these consequences.
 How can we read and expose the abstract world of finance and its often invisible infrastructures, regulations, corruption and materials? And what could be the role of journalists and artists to allow audiences to engage with the dark side of money?After the presentations of Paolo Cirio, Femke Herregraven and Paul Radu, moderator Cecile Landman introduces the panel discussion.
By Katía TruijenThe sixth session of MoneyLab #2 focused on bringing the dark side of money to light.
 Find part 2 here.
 Part 2 will discuss the Credit Commons.
This is the end of part 1 of this interview.
 This myth is taught in economics classes still and the implications of its wrongness are very profound.
 But this turned out to be false, so false, that the Bank of England admitted to it two years ago.
 Of course, (neoclassical) economists do not acknowledge that what the banks are doing is issuing money, their theory is that banks only lend money that already exists.
 So Positive Money, in restoring the money-creating power to the state is at least trying to tell the story that the state is in partnership with the people, and that, rather than banks, the state has the legitimacy to be sovereign and to issue money.
 The banks are profiting from the people by their very constitution.
Yes, and that’s a very serious issue because it is impossible to argue that the banks are working with and for the people in their act of issuing money.
They are creating money out of nothing.
 The banks have taken on the role of sovereign.
 Currently, the supply of money is all that the banks lent, that hadn’t previously been saved.
 That is the theory of fiat money, which we don’t have anymore.
 The difference is the supply of money.
Video source: The GuardianAnd go into debt…The government’s role is to issue money by spending more than it takes back in tax.
 It looks good for the government because it can say it’s not spending too much, but at the same time it forces everybody else to spend too much.
 That’s a problem.
 Now, along with others in government, George Osborne of the British Conservative Party is saying that the government should run a surplus, which means that the rest of the economy must run a deficit.
 On one side of the economy, ordinary people would earn and then spend, and on the other side, the government would spend and then earn, which would make a good cycle.
 If you spend more than you take in, you have to borrow and pay interest.
 In this myth, the government is like a household, that has to earn before spending, and money is treated as a commodity.
 It’s not the other way around, as the myth of handbag economics suggests.
 In theory, they spend, which is an act of issuance, and then tax back to prevent the inflation.
 This is exactly what governments do.
 If you issue new tokens, their value will go down, but the issuer takes the spending power.
Such as issue new tokens in order to fund collective projects?It would be very similar to taxing and spending.
 It helps them to allocate resources and helps them to agree on what they value together.
 When groups come together to work in solidarity, there are loads of devices they can use, hacks and things like that, and a currency is one of them.
 It also provides a way to build your own taxing system which leads to self-determination by allocating those resources.
 These units of account are worthless to anyone outside that group, so they can’t be taken away in tax.
 You can exercise some sovereignty by creating a unit of account and everyone agreeing that to value it in exchange with each other.
 Typically, they will issue these units out of nothing, as if they had currency or as IOU credit obligations, because you don’t benefit very much from a currency if you have to buy it first…Which is the difference between commodity-based currencies and credit-based currencies…Exactly.
 A complementary currency could build trust and issue units among a group that wants to exercise a little bit of economic power.
 I would like to see a society in which people exercise greater self-determination.
 This will always be at the cost of whoever is telling us what to do and how to be.
 Sovereignty is not something we can all strive towards, but greater self-determination is something we could.
 The king is the sovereign and nobody tells him what to do.
 It this what you mean by it?I don’t know much about the history of the word sovereignty, but it usually starts with the king.
The idea of taking back sovereignty sounds like it is about taking back power and expanding democracy.
 I think those are the main ones.
 Yet another is to take a little bit of sovereignty into our local groups.
 Another one is to understand more deeply how these systems work.
 One is to prototype.
What do you think is the role of complementary and alternative currencies in the process of transitioning to a different social model?I think they have several roles.
 Money isn’t real, it’s only a reflection or projection of other power dynamics in society.
 If you changed money, but not the attitude, the attitude would change it back.
 Money reflects our attitude towards the government, our attitude towards the rich and their attitude towards us.
It is not simply a matter of redesigning money and the purpose it should serve…I think that’s naïve.
 That committee will never be neutral.
 You start seeing that either a reform like that cannot happen at all, in which case all you can do is raise awareness about how bad things are, or you can say that if it did happen somebody will get to this democratically accountable committee.
 But as soon as you start bringing in the critique that a government is owned by corporations, this changes.
BC: What do you think about proposals of monetary reforms at the level of the state, like the Positive Money proposal in which money should be created debt-free and solely by the government, through a democratically accountable committee?MS: I think it’s great if you regard the monetary system as a separately individual system.
 So that’s a problem that goes deeper than the monetary system, to the system of privilege in society.
 They do have their own assets, but what they’re lending is a legal fiction and it is a privilege that they have been given by the government, the crown, the sovereign, whatever, and can then charge interest on.
 In fact, rich people don’t own money, they’re actually lending it out of nothing.
 The fundamental problem with the design of money is that it’s treated in all respects as a commodity which is owned by rich people and lent to everybody else, while money should be a medium of exchange first and foremost.
 Bruno Chies: Let’s start with a very general question: What is wrong, in your opinion, with today’s state-backed money?Matthew Slater: It’s hard to separate what’s wrong with money from what’s wrong in everything else in society.
 Education about money and all that it implies is a critical part of what Slater does.
 Together with professor Jem Bendell, he has also designed and is a tutor of the free massive open online course (MOOC) Money and Society, directed at people who want to understand money from a social innovation perspective.
 He is the co-founder and main developer of Community Forge, a platform for complementary currencies that runs more than 150 LETS and Time Banks.
Biography: Matthew Slater is a software developer and has been involved with complementary currencies for at least 8 years, since the crash of 2008.
In this interview, we discuss his project the Credit Commons (part 2), in greater detail, as well as broad range of topics: his reflections on our contemporary monetary system, the role of complementary currencies for achieving more self-determination at a local level, the importance of governance for the Credit Commons and his view on a more collaborative economy based on solidarity, where relations intermediated by money would be not so prevalent.
 He is very much aware that technology, and top-down reforms to the monetary system, are not enough to change power relations in society if they are not accompanied by a simultaneous change of consciousness among the people.
 There is, however, no sense of gullible techno-fetishism in his ideas.
 ‘You could do the whole global economy that way’, Slater envisions in this new monetary architecture of interconnected complementary currencies.
 He proposes a technology that will scale trust and solidarity beyond the local level, for communities running their economy with their own currencies.
Matthew Slater is a community currency engineer.
Thank you very much Matthew.
Yes, I believe we could do the whole global economy that way.
Basically it’s an architecture for scaling up trust and solidarity.
 The Credit Commons presents this sort of nested structure of groups of trust.
 We need to think in terms of forming groups of solidarity and have those groups form groups.
 The issue about creating a commons and governing it, is what I’d like to bring attention to with the Credit Commons.
 The solutions have to be situated at a deeper level.
 There are many people involved in monetary reform, and for many it’s a very compelling subject, but ultimately you cannot really get anywhere with money.
 Money and credit arrangements will follow.
 What we need is systems of governance that help us organize ourselves.
 Governance is even more important than money.
 In Debt the first 5000 Years, David Graeber drew a sweeping portrait of history in which there are times of stability, which is to say times of governance and trust in systems, when we used credit money, and times of instability, when there is a lot of conflict between nations and governance wasn’t something that could be relied upon, which are times of commodity money.
The term commons usually takes me back to the work of Elinor Ostrom and the question of governance: how can people find ways to govern these commons? How does that work in terms of money and credit in your proposal?There’s no credit without governance.
 Otherwise you’re taking an all or nothing risk.
 That might not be the way to write an app that goes viral, but it is the way to do something that really is useful.
 Be sure that you’re serving people whose values you agree with.
 You can collaborate and still build something that nobody needs.
Perhaps your advice to activist developers who want to make a difference in the world is to re-learn how to cooperate and collaborate…And to adopt an attitude of service.
 Many activist developers are imagining what’s needed and they think ‘if we write this, we’ll save the world’, and then it doesn’t happen.
 I thought this would be very appealing to developers, to have a chance to write some software that will be used in this way.
 We’re talking about hundreds of existing communities that are expressing a real need to go forward in radical reforms and cooperations.
Are you seeking software developers to this project?I’d love to involve some developers in this, but it’s hard.
 There isn’t any way to do this yet.
 That’s one reason why we also need to work on the advertisers’ API, in order to see what’s in other markets.
It might give you access to other markets…Yes.
 But that still doesn’t help you pay for the groceries in the shop.
 A platform would have a payment form that facilitates paying somebody in a different platform.
 It becomes possible for credit to move between platforms when they use a common protocol, a backbone to the system.
 If the platforms are joined together through the Credit Commons but every group is still using their own software, those issues are still exactly the same.
 At the moment each complementary currency is working pretty much with its own software or with a family of softwares, but there is no grand interoperability plan, there are no protocols that everyone agrees on.
 Do you think that the Credit Commons could change this?Yes, it should, but not directly.
How does that apply to the issue of convenience when using money? A problem with complementary currencies is that they’re very limited in scope and are not very convenient.
 The aim of the Credit Commons white paper is to create discussion.
 However, I’m not an expert in the software’s architecture, so I’m leaving that open at the moment.
It’s trust at two levels: 1) if I give you credit, I trust that you’re going to pay it back, and 2) we’re both participating in a trust group, with protocols, and I trust that you’re not gonna hack the ledger.
So you really build trust, not through code, but through people.
 In the permission blockchains you just do it with your friends and the people you trust.
 The thing about Bitcoin is that anybody can implement the protocol and participate, but they have to do the mining to make sure it’s good.
 That means an outsider cannot come in.
 They trust each other and the ledger stays intact, as long as they’re all good.
 The clients trust each other, so they don’t have to fight or compete.
 For example, Ripple… It’s called a permission blockchain, which means you don’t need the mining.
 It would be a consensus algorithm.
Is it based on blockchain?I haven’t gone so far as to specify the blockchain.
 It’s not a currency but it is a distributed ledger and that means we can all agree on what the ledger says.
 I’m also likening it to a cryptocurrency.
 The only requirement becomes running software that implements the protocol.
 The Credit Commons seeks to formalize that arrangement as well as open it up to groups outside that platform.
 CES is a platform with hundreds of groups in it that trade with each other and have nominal balance limits that are not harshly enforced and there isn’t really any governance about what the credit limits or the exchange rates should be.
How does it differ from other platforms, like Community Forge or Community Exchange System (CES)?Because it’s a protocol, it is not a platform.
 Credit Commons could be used locally or intercontinentally; it’s only a protocol.
 It seems to me that what’s needed is a global protocol to help us exchange with one another.
 But that is a function of money, so it depends on what your definition of money is.
 Some people would argue that it’s not money, it’s merely a system of exchange.
 The tag line is ‘money for the solidarity economy’.
 Is this a way to connect local economies operating with complementary currencies and create more solidarity?Yes, I think that’s exactly it.
That makes sense, and I think this is a very good bridge to your Credit Commons project.
 We need to bring the self-determination level down to the local, small groups, because the system is less easily corrupted this way.
 It seems that when our societies grow bigger they become dysfunctional.
 It’s by no means an impossible utopia, there already are tiny societies working like that.
 If that wasn’t the case, then there would be much less need for money.
 More things have to be monetized so that a greater proportion of our activities can be taxed and more money has to be borrowed.
 Everything is monetized now because the economy is huge and it still has to grow.
 You wouldn’t need everything to be monetized.
In this utopia what people would do would be a much closer expression of what they value, because they don’t have this top-down monetary system, expressing the values of either the tax recipient, the philanthropists, or the trillionaires.
 There are spaces in the economy for gift, barter and exchange with complementary currencies.
Talking about real utopias, you envision an economy in which complementary currencies play a role but economy is not fully monetized.
 If we want to be sovereign, we have to either find sources of money that don’t come with a value obligations, that are already aligned with what we want to do, or we’ll have to do without money.
 Which leads to the need to compete with each other and the wasting of resources in the process.
 We tend to chase the money and we do what the people with the money tell us to do.
 There’s not a lot left over these days.
 This is difficult because we’re also paying taxes.
 We the people, need to start working together, taking on responsibility, taking on leadership roles, and not relying on authority figures and governments to do it.
 So, the tool is there but we lack the consciousness, awareness or will to use it.
 The reality is that most people don’t seem to feel very much solidarity others and they certainly don’t express that by using a complementary currency.
 If they were to be used, it would mean that communities are acting in solidarity with each other are empowering each other.
 But they don’t work when people don’t use them.
 Do you mean they are a way to empower people directly on a local level?MS: If they would work, they would empower people.

BC: Let me go back to complementary and alternative currencies.

1D6pVt5ZcouFCDTQk72VVb7YVa3ismAuuw
@maxdovey.
 Once I got home, I registered myself a Bitcoin address but with not enough money to buy anything I await charitable donations.
 Everyone applauded when a video clip of Roger Ver self proclaimed ‘Jesus of Bitcoin’ and Bitcoin evangelist presented his orange Lamborghini, of which there was one parked outside the conference center.
 There are two sides to every Bitcoin but it felt like the majority of the audience at Reinvent Money were interested in the potential profit that could be made in this unregulated market.
 The attempt to escape income tax, transaction fees and state benefits in the wild wild west of unregulated, uncontrolled Bitcoin will recreate a new super rich elite (beyond the tech sector).
 Although I could never stand up and defend the banking system, I will argue for the need for state regulation on the free market.
 He voiced the belief that without the restrictions of the tired old bureaucratic banks we could trade freely, unregulated and untaxed to maximize growth and profit – for ourselves.
 He voiced the frustration that I felt from the crowd all afternoon, ‘the only thing stopping me getting rich is the bank’.
 A 10-minute screaming rant that denounced all bankers as terrorists to the cackles of whoops and jeers.
 And he did not disappoint.
 By this point it felt like the audience was waiting for celebrity economic preacher Max Keiser to come and deliver the final words of salvation.
 It was refreshing to listen to a panel of speakers that was not intent on breaking the chains off capital to make a more fluid market, but was interested in how the same systems can make social relations more stabilized.
 He echoed the need for more bottom-up initiatives that give citizens more control over their transactions.
 Blockchain can be used to create a digital commons, and allow people greater control over what they do with their money.
U initiative exploring how blockchain technology can engineer different social interactions, contracts and exchanges between citizens.
 Dyne is a government funded E.
 Why would we get excited about a new tool if we are going to create the same problems in term of wealth distribution? Jaromil from Dyne also presented some really innovative use cases for the blockchain in society that is not focused on outsmarting stock market algorithms.
 This was the first sobering antidote to a crowd that was so eager about accumulating mass profits that unfortunately I don’t think it was really swallowed, but to reiterate his point the blockchain doesn’t have to be used to increase the flow of capital and make you and your company mega rich.
 Van Arkel stunned the audience at one point by telling everyone that you don’t need more money than productive capacity and that the blockchain can also be used to stabilize trading by actually limiting the accumulation of capital.
 The services he has developed such as Cyclos are used globally by people in Africa by farmers trading crops with mobile money payments, for example.
  The refreshing voice of the afternoon came from Henk Van Arkel who applies the blockchain technology to social enterprises and non-for profit organizations.
 This real democracy, that he calls it, which you can edit on Github, allows anyone to make the rules that clearly create chaos.
 Still he won over many of the hearts and minds at Reinvent Money for his avoidance of the monetary system, his innovative use of crypto-currencies and his ‘Uber’ like emergency services that were coping with the crisis he has created.
 His crusade to create an independent state with libertarian values free from state control makes him a true libertarian extremist.
nl/the-liberland-crisis-dutch-red-cross-volunteer-niels-harmsen-arrested-in-liberland/)The immaturity of his project was made obvious at the end of his presentation when he bashfully invited everyone in the crowd to join his country – as long as we were not religious extremists, Russian communists and had enough money for the voluntary tax system….
 (https://bitcoinembassy.
 A case in hand would be the Dutch activist Niels Harman who migrated to Liberland to help provide humanitarian aid with the Red Cross and ended up getting arrested and detained for 30 days.
 The overwhelming demand for asylum has led to some disastrous incidents between people migrating to Liberland and the Croatian police.
 Jedlicka seems to deny having any social responsibility or acknowledging the consequences of conducting this social experiment in the middle of a refugee crisis.
 For example so far, ¼ (100,000) of asylum applications for Liberland originate from Egypt, so much that Egyptian officials have issued a warning against immigrating to western countries on ‘false grounds’.
 After his presentation I began researching the Liberland project and found some disconcerting issues surrounding the project.
 He talks about the ambitions he has for his country, namely to get recognized by international law by having enough foreign diplomats to vouch for him, the whole project seems like a bizarre college humor joke gone awfully wrong.
 Since April this year settlers have been arriving to the small island proclaiming Liberland as an independent country and developing a micro-nation.
 Activist and economist Vit Jedlicka, who has ran small independent political parties in his homeland Czech Republic, saw the opportunity to create his own state.
 The 7sq Kilometers of island that sits in the Danube River has been disputed territory with neither the Croatians nor the Serbs having full ownership.
 The “Free Republic of Liberland” created in April 2015 is an independent country created on a disputed island between Croatia and Serbia.
” 
Stacy HerbertVit Jedlicka has turned this financial fantasy into a reality in what was by far the most bizarre presentation of the afternoon by setting up his own country.
 “This is not about Bitcoin winning, banks are losing on their own and they don’t need any help.
 Antopolous greets any doubters with welcome arms, proclaiming that if we all join him on this financial awakening than the shaky share prices of Bitcoin will stabilize and we will all trade freely in the networked space of unregulated markets.
 You feel like your watching a spiritual leader when watching Antopolous, the clarity and concise way in which he presents Bitcoin technology as part of natural evolution makes you believe in a currency that has had some volatile spikes on the stock market of late.
 Antopolous goes to extraordinary lengths to convert the audience into Bitcoin believers and was buzzing round during lunchtime attempting to perform transactions with Bitcoin virgins.
 He describes Bitcoin as the first network centric protocol of money, he claims it is non hierarchical and p2p so therefore a democratic common good.
 Another effective analogy made by Antopolous was the use of network architecture to describe the current financial system, where we – the clients- are slaves and the banks – the servers – are the masters.
 This analogy makes any non-believer feel like a Luddite obstructing the natural evolution and flow of capital.
 He talks about how people during the Tsang Dynasty (618 – 907) in China that reluctantly began depositing their heavy gold for slips of paper that could be used for trading on the original Silk Road.
 He compares the current doubts and fears surrounding Bitcoin to the speculation and suspicion towards paper money.
 He does this by presenting Bitcoin as the natural next step in the evolution of money.
 It seems it is his job to make crowds of entrepreneurs feel safe with the blockchain technology and believe in the Bitcoin market.
 He is the chief security advisor for blockchain and delivers a very concise, well-versed lecture on the evolution of money.
 “Bitcoin is happening at a moment of history when we are seeing a transformation of many social institutions because of the networked era”Andrea Antopolous



And Andrea Antopolous is just the man to help you do that.
 The need for an alternative trading system has grown and blockchain technology is just about ready to facilitate the largest transformation of money since the invention of the credit card, all we need to do is believe in Bitcoin.
 It was repeatedly stated that the banking system is broken and now businesses are eager to begin trading without restriction using Bitcoin or blockchain technology.
 The frustration towards the banks has moved widespread, out of the ‘occupy’ movement(s) and into the mainstream business sector where the shouts for the distribution of wealth from the richest 1% is being echoed by your average businessman.
 Other issues that speakers raised were the use of transaction fees, mortgage rates and consistently low interest rates.
 A popular held view amongst the speakers is that qualitative easing only aids the housing market and allows rent prices to rise while it fails to simulate cash back into any other economy.
 Most of the morning was spent discussing the downfalls of the banking system.
 “Central bankers are in a race to destruction”
Edin MujagicThe cult at Reinvent Money was distinctly anti-banking.
 An elderly man in an orange fleece jumped up from his seat and shouted “We Are The Future, Jakob”.
 When asked about his thoughts on Bitcoin, to which he had none, the audience fumed at him, as if his methods of banking were old, defunct and obsolete.
 People yelled at him before even getting handed the microphone demanding to know why the central bank impeded the flow of money and why they weren’t doing anything to stimulating the economy.
 He presented how the economic policy created by the national government and the central bank was the best way to stabilize the economy, but it wasn’t until the end of his talk when the hecklers amassed into pure anti-bank outcry.
 Jakob had the difficult task of convincing the audience of the benefits of financial regulation and the central banking system.
 The first of those was Jakob De Haan, head of research from De Nederlandse Bank.
 There were only a handful of speakers that spoke critically of Bitcoin and did not believe that a self-regulating automated economy was the single savior to the current financial system.
 The majority of speakers compelled the audience with imagined new worlds with free markets, unregulated finance and flowing cyber capitalism.
 The largely white male audience all shared a sense of frustration at the current financial system and a firm belief that Bitcoin and blockchain technology will transform the world of finance.
 It was there on Saturday 26 September I stumbled into a mass gathering of entrepreneurs, businessmen and financial tech professionals buzzing over how Bitcoin will change the world.
 At Erasmus Business School of Finance.
“We are the Future, Jakob” 
Last weekend I found a new religion.
 In this sense, Ascribe promises to offer the solution for universally accessible ownership of digital property , comparable to the world wide web.
 Instead of trying to fight this fact, the other option could be to try to understand how things are spread: where things go and how they are being used.
 Pon even states that “every computer is a copy machine, everyday we violate someone else’s copyright over one hundred times”.
The internet as a problematic field for exponential dissemination of artworks and the lack of proper attribution and authorship is a major concern for the founders of Ascribe.
 These work in providing a traceable history of the artworks for both the artist to follow their works’ journey,  and for buyers to understand where the works come from.

Ascribe is based on three different components: first a registry, second a way to secure legalities, and third a visibility tool.
 Making use of the blockchain as for being a decentralized method that empowers the artist: “the content belongs to you and you control it”, enabling private data to be managed by its owner.
 Ascribe uses the blockchain technology and a cryptographic ID which binds the creator’s authorship to its digital file, “securing an unbreakable link between the artist and its creation”.
 It follows Ted Nelson’s philosophy of “linking” digital media objects, but now as a tracing method and a record for ownership.
 Ascribe is a management system for intellectual property that makes easy for the public to pay for the artworks and the artist to receive attribution.
We are then introduced to Ascribe, a project Bruce Pon is co-founder of.
 This makes it also possible for the consumer to be able to download under legal conditions, without infringing copyright.
 This way people can pay for the works and artists can earn from their work.
 A model which would include a Pay < and > earn system, similar to other existing platforms that provide both accessibility to the artwork itself and its license.
Bruce Pon believes that the public is willing to engage in different organizational model.
 Series of works are lost and found in the enormous amount of data circulating online, without knowing where it comes from and where it will end.
 “It’s because of this that the internet is like a Turkish bazar”, claimed Bruce Pon.
 In 1989, the computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee would then put together the components of the internet as we know it today, by implementing the HTTP – Hypertext Transfer Protocol, providing a one way link, opposed to the interconnected linkage proposed by Ted Nelson.
 Ten years later Wired magazine published an article called “The Curse of Xanadu”, defining the project as “the longest-running vaporware story in the history of the computer industry”.
” The Project Xanadu then aimed to link two objects by attribute, although due to the expansion and growth in complexity of the internet content it became an impossible mission to connect all its objects.
 The World Wide Web (another imitation of paper) trivializes our original hypertext model with one-way ever-breaking links and no management of version or contents.
 The mission statement of Xanadu envisioned an improvement of the structure of the world wide web: “Today’s popular software simulates paper.
 He was an American pioneer of information technology who coined the terms hypertext  and hypermedia and who was the founder of the Xanadu project in 1960.
While relating to the technological qualities and networked conditions of the digital, Bruce Pon made a historical reference to one of the early architects of the internet, Ted Nelson.
 Bruce Pon connects the answer to the “rules of the digital”, that allow the material to be easily and instantaneously copied, stored, transferred and distributed, without necessarily being credited.
 Why isn’t valued and protected as much as the others?”.
“Intellectual property is at this moment as valuable as any other physical property in the world.
By Joana ChicauBruce Pon presented Ascribe, a project that proposes a solution for artists to control intellectual property by constituting a new “ownership layer“ to the existing structure of the internet.
Monthly compensation €400 (0,8 fte)For further information you can contact Inte Gloerich: Inte [at] networkcultures [dot] orgApplications: if you are interested please send your resume and cover letter to max [at] networkcultures [dot] org by 2oth June 2016.
 You balance a desire to learn, take initiative and suggest better practices and take constructive feedback.
 In addition, you have strong writing and communication skills, and experience with social media management and web administration.
Internship duties vary but include:Research & Writing tasks:
• Write literature reviews on subjects related to MoneyLab
• attend project related events
• collect interesting and relevant literature
• identify possible partners, speakers, artists and related projects
• assist the program committee with writing the program
• write contributions for the MoneyLab project blog
• Update the project websiteProduction and communication tasks:
• logistical support, partner identification; liaison with partners and speakers
• Assisting INC staff with project- and event-related pre-production and development support (ie location, accommodation and catering scouting)
• targeted promotion activitiesOther tasks include:
• assist with general office operations
• attend meetings
• work as part of the organizational teamAs the INC has an international scope, active English skills are required, in speaking and writing.
We are looking for an enthusiastic, energetic, inquisitive (former) student with knowledge of and a demonstrated interest in MoneyLab related topics.
 The aim of the event is to focus on how creative engineering and creative thinking can directly interfere into hard-core economic debates and help tackle issues of trust, social concerns, scale and security in order to help foster and proliferate alternative models of revenue, exchange and distribution for artists and creative content.
 The two-day event will feature panel discussions, workshops, installations, art exhibitions and an evening program with music and performance.
Moneylab#3 Failing Better will take place on 1 and 2 December at Pakhuis De Zwijger, Amsterdam.
 It provides a platform for multi-disciplinary dialogues between a variety of people and initiatives, both commercial and non-commercial, to work on economic alternatives in digital economy.
MoneyLab is a network of researchers, artists, hackers and entrepreneurs and other creators that take up the call for critical and creative experiments with and interventions into alternative forms of exchange, ownership and the distribution of value.
Internship period: 29th August until 16 December 2016 (0.
The Institute of Network Cultures is looking for an intern with writing, research and production skills, for the organisation of MoneyLab#3: Failing Better that will take place on 1 /2 Dec 2016 in Amsterdam.
by @MaxDovey.
 Therefore spending a few days indulging in the potential implications of Fully automated Luxury Communism, as frivolous as it may sound, was a productive necessity, not just to identify a cohort of fellow ambitious futurists but also to get a sense of how the left will have to create something far more inclusive than basic luxury communism.
 Perhaps by envisioning this now we can begin to work out how the political left can strategically counter this imminent possibility, without retreating to local politics and small scale activism.
 I think it’s quite conceivable that in 30 years we could be living in a post-work society and It is intriguing to see a political vision hoping to restore core social values, such as welfare states and labour unions, in the face of networked platform capitalism.
 If Morozov’s prediction is accurate than Silicon Valley business ventures will attempt to turn state welfare into a on-demand service economy for everything.
 Restoring socialist organizations such as co-ops and trade unions will provide shelter for a politically or socially aware elite whilst the tech giants get their teeth stuck into Governance 2.
 In doing so he overlooks the tremendous impact that design and technology have already had in the world, in so far that powerful tech companies are apparently now attempting to absorb and replace national services.
 Morozov can deflate this indulgence by arguing that global change will only originate from within politics.
It remains to be seen whether Luxury Communism will become more a vogue topic to discuss over dinner and indulge in the undeniably attractive potential for post-work lifestyles and basic incomes.
 He argues that part of the reasons this is not happening is that activists are still using an outdated paradigm to frame their approach; in his opinion ‘quoting Karl Marx wont cure some of the oppressive qualities of global capitalism’ but designing some innovative solutions with new technologies might.
 By deploying an infrastructure suggested by Gupta, we would practically begin fighting battles we can actually win, such as micro water filters to prevent disease or 3D-printed homes that could provide shelter less than €500.
 Gupta presents all of this in a feasible way, incidentally avoiding political issues with logic, applied science & networked computing.
 Gupta ran through a bunch of technological solutions to most of these problems while insisting that these basic needs have to be met before we can begin discussing or designing post-work utopias for ourselves.
 Injury, illness, thirst, hunger, coldness, heat.
 Gupta’s diagram presented 6 basic human needs that could be solved with relatively cheap p2p technology.
In response, Vinay Gupta presented a pragmatic design-based schematic to solve the humanitarian crisis with open source and de-centralized technology.
 I would argue that there is an increasing movement showcased not only within this conference but in design communities throughout Europe that are attempting to challenge Morozov’s diagnosis with p2p collective organization, open source technology and political power.
 When Morovoz claims that the political right have been the only ones capable of harnessing networked technology to fuel their political ambition, he is referring to a historic trajectory rather than acknowledging recent technological activism.
 He seemingly neglects the work done by organisations such as D-cent who have developed digital tools for direct democratic parties (including 15M movement) across Europe.
 His support for 15m movement as the only distinct movement from the left that can grasp the full scale of neo-liberalism is condescending and far from convincing.
 However, as they gain increasing power and reach an electorate majority I wonder how Morozov will sustain his reductive separation between the bureaucrats and tech elites, when if his prediction of entrepreneurial welfare is correct, the two will no longer be distinguishable.
 This direct democratic movement is a bottom-up initiative to reform politics from the socialist left.
 When asked directly for an example of transformative politics he half heartedly indicates support for the 5 Star Movement in Italy.
 This sobering diagnosis punctured much of the excitement towards socialist technological accelerationism and Morozov clearly sees any significant global change originating from within politics, not design.
 For Morozov, the inevitable narrative for post-capitalism is entrepreneurial welfare, based on a feudalist monopoly that uses citizen data to produce commercial identities and post-border nationalities.
 Morovoz claims that as Google and Facebook move towards neo-feudalism and cities become orientated around smart technology and openness, open data style hack labs are futile attempts to frantically prototype alternatives before the eventually engulfing of entrepreneurial welfare.
 According to Morozov, digital tech companies are attempting to substitute state welfare in order to protect themselves from the instability of their current economic model that relies on the speculative advertising market and provide the freedom to manage citizens without the interventions of governments or as Silicon Valley often nicknames ‘The Paper Belt’.
 Silicon Valley’s research into UBI and Google’s recent acquisition of Metamind (used to diagnose patients in the UK’s National Health Service) all indicate a dwarfing of state run services to outsourced tech services that, in Morozov’s view, will give way to a Silicon Valley entrepreneurial welfare state.
 Admittedly, his forecast for Luxury Communism is probably the most likely, he presents the intrusion of Silicon Valley into state-based welfare and highlights the interest of tech giants into schemes such as UBI.
 Morozov propels the effects of neo-liberalism as the paralysis of ‘what is left of the political left’ and candidly presents an ideology so far ingrained into Western culture that any alternative is simply indulgent fantasy.
 Morozov views ‘Fully Automated Luxury Communism’ as an euphemism for ‘full employment for the creative class’ insisting that the audience don’t have the luxury to talk about communism’.
To put a stop to any further dreaming of post-work utopias Evgeny Morozov delivered a meticulous diagnosis of the political economy that left little space for designers to imagine alternative political or social orders.
  When some of the political values within the luxury communism vision are connected to places of extreme poverty such as refugee camps and homeless shelters, the demands for luxury communism appear short sighted and problematically naïve.
  Sterling did an excellent job at revealing this oversight, intentionally highlighting refugee camps as pertinent examples of post-work commune living outside of state or market governance.
 As Sterling presented his personal Pinterest account, in which he highlights his favorite interior designs within sqauts and communes, the values of counter culture movements such as squatting become little more than superficial style indicators, devoid of meaning or political value.
 It brought the make believe contradictory notion of luxury and communism firmly to ground.
 Sterling ran through these existing social structures highlighting the qualities that they share with a luxury communist future, repeatedly asking himself (and the audience) if they sincerely wanted to live in one of these communities.
 These ranged from pensioners (post-work society), cruise liners (machine designed for luxury) and the Amish community (no capitalism, collective workforce, no WiFi) and Christiania, the outlawed area of Copenhagen collectively governed by its artist and bohemian residents.
Bruce Sterling took the stage on the second day to provide an extensive list of existing contexts and scenarios where some of the luxury communist values ideals are already put in practice.
 With buzz-words such as de-centralized It is important not to automatically denote that this implies more democratic because there is lots of evidence to suggest that this is not the case.
 The cypto-currency bitcoin for example was been revealed to have over 70% of the wealth owned by 1% of the bitcoin community and more recently the democratic fairness of DAOs was challenged in an article on Hacking Distributed.
 Although both platform co-ops and venture communist style approaches try to put human co-ownership at the center of their design, Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) and other de-centralized alternatives have regularly been exposed as biased, unequal and centralized concentrations of power and wealth.
 However, as we have repeatedly seen with Bitcoin and more recently in consensus based systems such as ConsenSys, decentralized does not inherently mean more democratic.
Throughout the two days the word ‘decentralized’ was regularly used to refer to more fair or equally distributed systems.
 Many within the Basic Income movement believe that the 23% in favor of UBI in Switzerland will increase over time and since the initial poll 69% of all the Swiss voters believe that there will be more referendums on the idea.
 Like many within the Basic Income movement, Ponader appears unconcerned with achieving immediate mass appeal with UBI, rather he presents the prospect of UBI as the inevitable solution to mass automation of the labor market.
 While these DIY schemes are directly implementing UBI, the national government of Switzerland just held their first public referendum on the matter, which showed just 23% of voters to be in favor of such a system.
 Johannes Ponader from Mein Grundeinkommen (My Basic Income) spoke of the rapid popularity of his self initiated basic income lottery, a collective crowdsourced UBI scheme that annually allocates €12,000 to one of its members.
 Will it be necessary for platform co-ops to scale, or collaborate with traditional unions, will they be able to compete in the on-demand market whilst still ensuring workers with stable and secure livelihoods?Another concept that is fearlessly escalating into European-wide policy is Universal Basic Income (UBI).
 Although it is seems like familiar tactics for the left to unionize and protect workers’ rights in the face of expansive and exploitative capitalism, we have yet to see how models for trade unions can flourish alongside silicon valley enterprises.
 This type of activism draws upon the managerial coordination of trade unionists, but pulls in the on-demand platform consumer as an honorable and equitable member.
 Rather than wait for Governments to pass laws to protect independent contractors working in the share economy, many within the Platform Cooperativism movement are working to build services with added social awareness, with collective equity and workers’ rights built into the software design of the platform.
 Within these initiatives there is a focus towards improving workers’ rights within the on-demand economy, as tech companies now manage an increasingly large portion of the labor market (1/3 of American workforce is an independent freelancer) the the need for legal rights and unionization becomes increasingly pertinent.
 Trebor Scholz from The New School in New York highlighted some workers’ cooperative movements that are countering share economy companies with initiatives such as Peerby – a platform that facilitates borrowing and sharing of community resources or La’Zooz – the driver owned car share business.
Much of the first day of the Summit was spent discussing existing technological products and services, and presenting working alternatives.
 The picturesque town of Weimar and the cultural history of Walter Gropius’s Bauhaus provided the perfect backdrop to discuss the prospect of a socialist technological revolution imagined and initiated through the arts and design.
 A distinct reference for this movement is Alex Williams and Nick Srnieck’s book Inventing the Future (2015) in which the authors lay out a framework for the political left to create a socialist utopia that involves fully automated labor and universal basic income.
 Fully automated luxury communism enables the left to vocalize a vision for the future that utilizes aspects of technological acceleration to bring about socialist values and anti-capitalist politics.
 The provocative ‘Fully Automated Luxury Communism’ functions as a stylish placeholder for a new school of thought that concatenates socialist fantasies such as a post-work society and universal basic income (UBI) within a landscape of technological accelerationism and hyper-capitalism.
 For anyone unsure of the meaning of ‘luxury communism’: it is a vague concept introduced by a few sensationalist articles published in Vice last year.
A diverse selection of artists, designers and entrepreneurs spent two days in Weimar last week imagining how to use design, software and networks can permeate or alter existing political and social structures.
 For these blockchain start-ups it is a case of getting the musicians and artists on board to blockchain their work, but the exciting part is what happens if and when these platforms reaches a critical mass.
 These range from democratic online voting systems or online marriage certificates.
 Ethereum, the application that Heap built Mycelia on, is actively encouraging people to build their own applications on the blockchain and so far some exciting prototypes have been shared.
The contracts created via the blockchain protocol can go much further than copyright.
 If musicians see and seize the potential for unregulated exchange, than blockchain might receive a valuable blessing from the creative class.
 The permanence of blockchain and the success of the blockchain platform for the creative industries lie partly in the resilience and willingness of musicians and artists to begin distributing their work on these new platforms.
There will be plenty other uses for the blockchain in society, however these initial start-ups are focused on how the blockchain can be used in the creative market.
 These companies argue that the transparency of the blockchain will enable artists to regain ownership over their creations.
 On the other hand these new companies are using the blockchain to monetize immaterial or reproducible art by creating copyright clauses and traditional legislation out of blockchain protocol.
 One the one hand you have the techno-libertarian fantasy of a de-centralized unregulated exchange network that inspired models of exchange like bitcoin and can be traced back to the p2p foundation.
The current landscape of companies using the blockchain to create autonomous marketplaces for music and art represents conflicting views on rights and property.
 The idea of an original is much more pertinent in the arena of digital art than music, and one can see the appeal for digital artists to use blockchain methods to certify, license and distribute their work.
 The belief is that the ‘fair use’ policy of creative commons licenses will no longer have to be enforced, as it becomes techno-protocol via the blockchain.
 When an artwork is registered on the blockchain via the platform, a unique bit hash is generated ensuring the origin of each bit can be traced.
 The creation of authenticity from the blockchain ID of a digital file enables a market for selling, loaning and buying of digital art.
 Companies like Ascribe and Monegraph use the blockchain to authenticate the artist, and to license a digital file.
 The blockchain ID of a work of art attempts to solve the issue of authenticating digital artworks have been strife since the days of net-art.
“Everybody is looking for the killer use-case” (Bruce Pon, Ascribe 2015)Ascribe uses the blockchain to authenticate digital artworks and license intellectual copyright by writing a digital file onto the blockchain network.
 Peertracks is one of the first blockchain applications specializing in music but the attributes of Blockchain are being applied in other areas of creative culture.
 The attraction for musicians to use the blockchain lies in (re)gaining control over their work through managing their own licenses and setting up direct contracts with fans that could evolve into a community of shared owners and producers of the work.
 Peertracks does not attempt to restrict the sharing of your music (which is probably a good thing for publicity and viral marketing) but allows for artists to write their own licenses and set their own financial return.
 As people begin to pay for your music with prices you have set (similar to music publisher site Bandcamp and small streaming chargers begin to accumulate, the artist and shareholders begin to see a financial return.
 By using the record of transactions created by the blockchain, the revenue of music sales and streaming charges are automatically returned to the shareholder(s).
 Each artist can set the rights for each file and sell shares in ownership using bitUSD – a currency similar to bitcoin that is traded against the dollar.
Peertracks offers the potential for co-ownership or crowd sourcing your rights and shares to your music.
 These networked and distributed records in turn create the chain of blocks that can be used as contracts and provide the legal authenticity to license digital files.
 Every time that file is streamed or accessed this can be recorded and tracked via the blockchain; making a public ledger of transactions.
 The digital file is given a unique blockchain ID that authenticates its origin and records that file on the blockchain network.
 On Peertracks musicians can upload their songs and set an amount of credits (shares) for that song.
 The potential for blockchain to alter the digital streaming sector seems viable on paper, but will artists take the plunge or will blockchain music services crash as quickly as Jay-Z’s ‘Tidal’ streaming service?To find out I looked at one of these companies, the newly launched Peertracks, that uses the bitshare music blockchain – a set of bits allocated to trading music shares on the blockchain.
 From publishing firms like Kobalt  (who interestingly funded the initial report by Berklee) and new streaming services such as Peertracks that use the blockchain to enable a p2p music streaming network, these new blockchain platforms are singing the blockchain gospel and hope to sign-up enough musicians to infiltrate the music industry and perhaps other creative sectors.
A handful of new services have sprouted of late that aim to get musicians acquainted with the blockchain without having to get their hands dirty with the code.
 For example, the artist can write their own licenses and give the large percentage of profit normally taken from the publisher to the loyal fans who share and promote their songs, thus creating a community of shared ownership.
 The immediacy of the blockchain network enables for a more direct relationship between artist and customer that not only allows for faster financial returns, it could also inspire closer communities between artists and their fan base.
The attraction for musicians is the opportunity to operate independently, distribute your music online via your own website and immediately receive the financial returns on your music – rather than relying on centralized platforms like Spotify or iTunes to provide slow and disproportionate advertising revenue.
” Although Heap does not go into technical details about how the Mycelia platform operates, she does envision how the blockchain application could change the music industry.
 Empowering the artists, turning and landing the industry finally on its feet.
 With this grand library of all music forming the basis upon which all music businesses from digital radio to tour bookings can then grow and thrive from.
 A home that allows creativity to flow, connect and facilitate collaboration on so many levels, many of which just haven’t been possible.
 The Mycelia platform is a prototype that uses the blockchain to distribute Heap’s music, which she describes as“Open source, a living, breathing, smart, decentralised, transparent, adaptable, useful, shining home for our love of music.
 She has teamed up with Ethereum to co-develop a platform called “Mycelia” that uses the blockchain to distribute her new single “Tiny Human”.
There has been no shortage of musicians speaking out against ITunes or Spotify lately (David Bryne, Taylor Swift) but the musician Imogen Heap is the first to attempt to do something about it.
com), reveals the disproportionate and exploitative revenue split between artists and publishers and describes blockchain as the solution.
rethink-music.
 A recent report conducted by Berklee Institute for creative entrepreneurship (www.
 Perhaps that is why music labels are eager to learn about the potential implications of blockchain as an alternative to online streaming.
 Will creatives look pass the instability of crypto-currencies – that all run on blockchain’s protocol – and trust in blockchain to manage, distribute and license their work?The music business was the first industry to be blown apart by p2p networks in the early nineties when the affects of music download websites such as Napster crippled the record industry.
 This p2p infrastructure presents a new landscape for digital creatives’ where ownership, authenticity and creative control have the potential to be reclaimed by their authors.
 In a similar vein to the file history that you can see when using services like Google Docs or Dropbox that show and log the events of a file every time it is edited, the blockchain essentially does that to every file, but stores this history via a p2p network of computers, creating a solid infrastructure of ‘recorded’ files and transactions.
 This enables file ownership, copyright and distribution to be automatically enforced and documented by the protocol of the network.
 Imagine a public record of transactions where the origin of every digital file can be traced and recorded.
Can the anti-establishment ideals of blockchain technology convince artists to take back control of their creations?A handful of new start-up companies are declaring that blockchain will revolutionize digital music and transform how artists produce and distribute their art online.
Universal Basic Income
Feminist Economics
Decentralized Democracy
Smart Contracts
DAOs
Networked Publishing
P2P Distribution
Digital Licenses
Music Revenue Models
Platform Cooperativism
Crowdfunding
Commons Transition.
 A two-day symposium of talks, workshops, performances and parties that tackle the assumption that there is anything too big to fail.
On Thursday 1 and Friday 2 December, Moneylab#3 will bring together a cacophony of artistic and economic experimentation that offer strategies for the 99%.
 It starts with the conviction that after the great Bank Robbery of 2008, we can no longer only criticize financial capitalism but need to foster alternatives.
Date: 1 – 2 December 2016
Conference: Pakhuis de Zwijger, Amsterdam (NL)
Cabaret: TBD, Amsterdam
Afterparty: Roest Bar, AmsterdamThe aim of MoneyLab is to research, map and probe (alternative) strategies of redistribution and intervention in digital economy.
 lunch
Students: 50% discount, incl lunch
Tickets for individual panels will be sold separately from September.
 lunch / € 60 passe-partout incl.
Regular: € 30 per day incl.
Tickets are now available HERE.
 the technicians”.
 If you want to frame the expansion of Blockchain as a political revolution than I would go one step further to ask what are you fighting for? Social justice and inequality won’t be solved by any technical application so if your building applications from the frequently termed ‘bottom-up’, take greater consideration to ask who it is for and who would it benefit? This way the democratic social values that Blockchain technology consistently promotes might begin to permeate to the rest of society rather than remain entrenched in a power struggle between what Gupta describes as “The battle between the lawyers vs.
 At the end of his presentation Gupta emphasized the emergence of Blockchain as a class war by commenting “until now it has been historically impossible to re-write the political system from the bottom up”.
 The desire to uproot the dichotomies of power with a distributed public ledger should be met with greater consideration and questioning of what would actually benefit from becoming de-centralized, distributed and autonomous.
 Unless you are working in the financial sector, there is currently very little impetus for individuals to begin implementing Blockchain into their day-to-day lives.

Consequently, the political rhetoric surrounding Blockchain as a tool for anti-authoritarian, de-centralized freedom is shadowed by its imminent widespread dominance in the financial sector.
 This is another massive blow for Bitcoin advocates as it appears that the technology will become the basis for global finance and the de-centralized, open source, p-2-p public ledger will be replicated into a private, centralized and controlled system to serve the banks.
 Just last week the Bank of England announced its very own bitoin crypt-currency replica called RSCoin, built on a private and centralized Blockchain.
 The R3 consortium is an unorthodox collaborative organization consisting of 43 of the world’s largest banks to work together to investigate how Blockchain technology could improve the world of finance.
 The major banks and financial companies were quick to start investigating and incorporating Blockchain early on and formed the R3 consortium in 2014.
 What is scarcely mentioned within the Blockchain bubble is the banks appropriation of Blockchain as the newest electronic payment system.
 Without any large-scale examples of Blockchain applications successfully supporting communities and the commons, the remaining attraction is the renegade; anti-authoritarian attitude that distributed p-2-p technologies will somehow overthrow governments and central banks.
 The examples of Blockchain technology liberating communities to collectively manage their resources in a de-centralized or autonomous manner are still abstract thought experiments and draft prototypes at best.
 This promise relies on citizens using the available software to liberate themselves from the current tyranny of power by designing ‘world-changing’ applications.
 The anticipation surrounding Blockchain is magnified by anti-authoritarian rhetoric and juvenile ‘taking back the power’ attitude with de-centralized software and open source applications.
 We are repeatedly led to believe that it will create a more democratic and equal society however I am not convinced that any of the uses of Blockchain presented at this event will fulfill that promise.
 It is very appealing to believe in all the promises Blockchain technology poses to solve because of the libertarian political rhetoric that surrounds it.
 All the speakers presented their individual versions of bright promising futures that use Blockchain technology.
 By contextualizing the Bitcoin phenomenon within the cypherpunk movement and presenting the history of databases the audience at Fiber may have been left still wondering about the social relevance of Blockchain, but are at least assured of its technical significance.
 Gupta dramatically over-simplifies this dichotomy by calling it “The Lawyers vs the Technicians”, a social struggle between working classes (computer programmers) and the privileged elite (technocrats).
 Gupta, as a self-confessed cypherpunk, sees Bitcoin and Blockchain as a linear outcome of the anti-authoritarian digital movements of the 90s and like many Bitcoin-enthusiasts, he is radically anti-authoritarian and takes any opportunity to criticize current state or democratic organizations as centralized hives of power and control.
 The cypherpunks were digital activists who used cryptography and other (open source) computer programming tools to ensure privacy in electronic communication to hack and oppose state governance.
 Gupta continues to identify the social and cultural origins of Blockchain as a consequence of cryptography and cypherpunk hacker culture.
 He exclaims that the Blockchain ‘fuses together network and data in a away that was never possible’.
 engineer, summarizing the complexities of older systems and the beautiful simplicity of a single universal networked database – the Blockchain.
 Gupta historizes the evolution of the database from the perspective of an I.
 The final speaker to take to the stage was Vinay Gupta who gave an energetic presentation on the history of databases and the cultural and social origins of Blockchain.
 Although this sounds like a libertarian dream for a few it could be a de-centralized panopticon for the many.
 Distributing the power for anyone to create their own law enforcing applications (with software such as Ethereum) is socially democratic in production (everybody gets to make their own digital contract) but could lead to a regime of networked governmentality in reality.
 The potential for automated agents to enforce law and social governance should be examined with great caution, because in distributing power this way you simultaneously reduce autonomy of individual citizens and the power of the state.
 As David Golumbia outlined at Moneylab#2 in December last year (video), the libertarian attitude towards distributed de-centralized governance contradicts and demolishes core socialist values – such as state regulation and institutions such as the welfare state.
 This is why the prospect of autonomous automated legal governance is something to be concerned about and not something that should be easily gift wrapped into the de-centralized libertarian package; that is the idea that ‘distributed technology will be empowering for everyone’.
 That is why lawyers often describe legal procedures with the cliché ‘every case is unique’.
 A crucial issue regarding this is that law is intentionally ambiguous, this allows for a certain degree of human agency for individuals to create their own moral and ethical choices within a legal framework.
 For example, I might one day buy a car but then be unable to keep up with my credit repayments; with a smart contract the car could be automatically locked down until I could fulfill my payment responsibilities.
 When you combine smart contracts and networked technology such as the Internet of Things you are able to enforce contracts without human mediation.
 Although Filippi acknowledges that smart contracts cannot and should not replace all legal governance, she does believe there are many outdated legal procedures that could be converted into smart contracts.
As an associate at Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law School Primavera De Filippi is concerned with how Blockchain can transform law and create new forms of social governance.
 I hope I am not alone in feeling that a meritocratic scoring model for validating social relations with tokens would be an implementation of the worst aspects of social media business models and I fail to see how digitizing the emotional value between friends into a quantified currency could be empowering for communities.
 The prospect of scoring friends with a numerical value between 1 and 10 and using this number to facilitate and record informal exchanges seems anything but social.
 Although FreeCoin is not directly calculating market value based on your social relationships, it is adapting a numerical scoring model for validating social relations to produce a unique ‘social’ cypto-currency.
 The after-effects of these platforms have perpetuated an insatiable desire to measure and quantify every social relationship into a numerical value.
 The business social media platform LinkedIn explicitly quantifies friends and relationships with ratings and scores to aid the unemployed find work in the labor market.
 Social media platforms such as Facebook use friendships and social groups to create targeted advertising campaigns that turn every encounter, every click and every like, into quantifiable economic figures.
 I can understand the need to design an electronic currency that reflects and incorporates relationships and trust between social networks, however using social relations as units of economic value descends from the commoditization of friendships used within social media businesses.
 In order to account for the value shared between friends and social groups, FreeCoin software would need to measure and quantify those friendships to validate it as ‘social currency’.
 Although it is an admirable concept I am concerned there is a disheartening ramification in turning the quality of a person’s social relations into a cypto-currency.
 By putting people at the center of the design of FreeCoin, Jaromil wants to re-instate trust into a trustless system.
 In experimenting with the proof of work concept Jaromil is re-defining how value is expressed and exchanged by people and how technology can measure and distribute that value.
 FreeCoin is a social currency that adapts the ‘proof of work’ concept used in Bitcoin to validate social gifting and exchange within communities.
 This is why Jaromil helped produce FreeCoin, an e-wallet created for exchange and trading between friends; he calls it a ‘social wallet’.
 For example, what about lending someone you know some money, with no agreed set time or date to pay it back? This type of unconditional gifting is difficult to program into digital lending systems.
 This model, he argues, suits one type of transaction but there are plenty of other reciprocal forms of exchange that occur within informal economies that could become recorded transactions.
 However, as Jaromil points out, the software behind Bitcoin is what you call a ‘trustless system’: it assumes every single user is corrupt and fraudulent in order to protect and secure itself from being hacked.
 This collective action and mobilized resistance sparked Jaromil’s interest in Bitcoin as a de-centralized tool for collective social organization.
 Perhaps this is why Jaromil was not immediately interested in Bitcoin until it was used to defend and support Wikileaks against the financial blockade inflicted by Visa, Mastercard & Paypal in response to the leak of US diplomat cables in September 2011.

D-cent produces digital programs, code and software that aim to change societal structures to more open, democratic forms of organization.

 The next speaker was Jaromil from D-cent – a EU funded organization that has been exploring and developing tools for new forms of democratic social governance.
 He argues that we can create a new value system by taking the generative, open, p2p models of the Internet and integrating them into physical and material goods with Blockchain applications.
 Initiatives such as sustainable energy that can be collectively managed and distributed via a Blockchain ledger, or car-pooling where the profits are automatically distributed within social groups.
 For Bauwens, the application of Blockchain is an opportunity for de-centralized peer produced initiatives to take hold in the physical material world through logistics, transport and smart technology.
 In light of this, Bauwens is confident that Blockchain technology (the technology that powers Bitcoin) can transform how value is produced and exchanged in the way we exchange physical and material goods similar to how networked technologies enabled the knowledge commons in the rise of the information age.
 It is Bauwens’ reservations about Bitcoin that frame his vision for a post-capitalist society and new value regime(s) that can be created by Blockchain, not Bitcoin.
 For him, Bitcoin as a currency has turned into a de-centralized, distributed form of free market capitalism that should not be viewed as a new form of value exchange, but as another currency that is traded on the stock market.
 Bauwens highlights how Bitcoin, in attempting to be completely de-regulated from the central banks, has become completely dependent on free-market capitalism.
  After clarifying the blurred lines between share economy principles and digital monopolies Bauwens goes on to address some common misconceptions about the crypto-currency Bitcoin.
 Bauwens makes clear distinctions between what he calls ‘Net-archical capitalism’ (Facebook, Uber) that are centralized companies interested in profit and ‘Global Commons’ initiatives such as Wikipedia & Couchsurfing, which are not for profit and geared towards collective social benefit.
 Bauwens uses the term ‘net-archical’ to describe the extractive mechanisms of major online platforms such as Facebook & Twitter and articulates the extractive & plundering nature of share economy services such as Uber and Airb’n’b.
 P-2-P values and initiatives towards a new commons have gained a lot of traction in different communities around the world and can be followed on the website http://commonstransition.
         Bauwens wants to show how the economy is moving from an extractive model to a generative model – one of value production – and insists that there is a real bottom up transition movement towards new systems of value that are not based on market costs but on social benefit.
 He shows a linearity of trade from early civilization to the fall of the Roman Empire, and from the industrial revolution to the extractive economy we have today.
 Bauwens anticipates a dramatic change in dominant value systems and supports this claim with the view that dominant value regimes change roughly every 500 years.
 Bauwens described the social context for the rise of the commons and explained how Blockchain and crypto-currencies can assist in this change of what he called ‘global value regimes’.
 Localized movements, informal economies and community currencies were also part of the picture painted by Micheal Bauwens who delivered the opening keynote.
 The crypto-currency aims to create a sovereign state for the indigenous people, helping to protect them from global market forces by facilitating their own trade and local economy.
 One of those examples is Mazacoin a crypto-currency that is used to trade between different native American tribes in Dakota, USA.
 It began with a basic overview from Michelle Kasprzak who acted as moderator, explaining in layman’s terms the fundamental principles of Blockchain and providing clear examples of it’s use in social contexts.
 The evening program consisted of four presentations that demonstrated the promising potential of Blockchain technology in different areas of society.
Michel Bauwens and The Promise Of The Blockchain
Thursday 25 February 2016
This event was organised by FIBER and De Brakke Grond and was part of FIBER’s Coded Matter(s) series and the year programme of the De Brakke Grond ‘All Future Memories’ De Brakke Grond, Amsterdam ‘Michel Bauwens and The Promise Of The Blockchain’ was attended by both artists and entrepreneurs eager to be at the cutting edge of the latest speculative boom in disruptive technology – the Blockchain.
Please save the date for Thursday 3 and Friday 4 December, when MoneyLab#2: Economies of Dissent will take place in Amsterdam.
Amidst crashing markets the second MoneyLab conference hosts artists, activists, developers, scholars, and journalists that (re)imagine, re-model and challenge global financial stagnation.
You can order your tickets here.
Two examples are for instance finance hackers Robin Hood asset management, democratizing intellectual (digital) property by way of Ascribe and many others.
The MoneyLab#2: Economies of Dissent flyer is out now and coming to a debating center near you, bringing you program info of the upcoming MoneyLab symposium on Thursday 3 and Friday 4 December.
notes from Robert Van Boeschoten , write up by Max DoveyFeatured image from Plastic Madonna project.
 As the industry of crowdfunding grows there will undoubtedly be more events like this, it is necessary to ask how these meet-ups can benefit campaigners in more than ways that are solely financial.
 Events like Crowdfest proliferate the ‘elevator pitch’ aspect for crowdfunding campaigns and provide an opportunity to meet other campaigners who are embarking on the same process.
 Many crowdfunding projects struggle to repeat or continue funding for a project so a lot of emphasis is put on getting it right first time.
The event was coordinated by Douw & Koren, a crowdfunding consultancy firm that assist people with making their financial targets.
 This one size fits all approach did not reward all of the campaigners who would of benefited from a more specialist or smaller audience.
 From funding documentaries on child soldiers in Africa to helping set up a new vegetarian restaurant in Amsterdam, campaigns from all categories were programmed back to back in the Crowdfest showcase.
 The broad range of projects consequently made the event similar to a variety show of crowdfunding campaigns.
 The festival was an opportunity for people to pitch their project to a mass audience and gain more financial investors.
 Crowdfest took place in Johan Huizingalaan in West Amsterdam on Saturday 26 September showcasing over 50 different crowdfunding campaigns.
 Despite a distributed implementation the Bitcoin system is a centralised ledger of financial transactions.
To summarise this writeup, the block chain used by the Bitcoin system is a form of hash chain that is very suitable for distributed computation with continually added data to be hashed where all data is collected by each distributed hashing node.
 The Bitcoin system does not have a built-in mechanism to recover from such a breach of security.
 This system assumes the correct implementation of software at each miner, and that this software has not been modified unnoticed by the miner, e.
 Security in the Bitcoin system is based on making all transactions public while each miner semantically verifies every transaction before adding it to the data to be hashed.
 Hence, the blockchain does not guarantee the security of the Bitcoin system.
 To summarise: there is no semantic relationship between the creation of a block chain and the additional data hashed into it.
 The transaction has to perform this evaluation correctly for the database to be correct.
 Before a transaction can be consolidated in the database, it has to be semantically evaluated in a process separated from updating the database.
 A correct transaction is one in which, for instance, the account paying money has enough funds and the owner of the account is the person authorising the transfer.
 It does not ensure that the transactions are in fact correct.
 However, consolidation and synchronisation are not sufficient for the correct operation of the ledger: it merely makes sure that all instances of the database contain the result of all transactions in the right order.
The block chain does a decent job of consolidating and synchronising the distributed database when implementing the Bitcoin ledger.
 This forces Bitcoin to operate as a closed financial system, using its own currency, where money creation has no macroeconomic consequences.
 An interesting consequence of this lottery aspect of mining comes from the creation of additional value out of thin air.
 The purpose of the lottery is to provide a financial incentive to acting as a miner.
 Being a miner in the Bitcoin system is like partaking in a lottery in which the price of each lottery ticket is the cost of computing the hashes.
 The newly added money is allocated to the miner that computes the block chain.
 Independently from the prime consolidating and synchronising functions of the blockchain, computation is also used to add a small, fixed value to the pool of spendable money.
However, the Bitcoin system is not without its commercial aspect.
 As the Bitcoin system is supported by a community of miners that are seemingly primarily motivated by ideals and ideology, considerations of environmental and commercial effects may be irrelevant, in particular at the current size of the system.
 However, there is a body theoretical and practical knowledge on the implementation of distributed systems and cheaper techniques do exist.
 Even without considering the environmental consequences of wasting energy, it seems hard to scale such a distributed system to a very large size, especially if used commercially.
 All energy spent by all these processors, bar that of the “lucky” one, is wasted.
 However, it is one that uses a lot of energy as each of the processors is actively computing the next hash value in the chain for 10 minutes each time, while applying all its processing power.
The process of the computation of a block chain from a consolidating and synchronising function could be used for any distributed implementation of a shared database.
 The block chain beauty is that the computation used to randomly pick the lead processor amongst the set of distributed processors is the very same computation used to consolidate the database and in the creation of the synchronisation token.
 They then synchronise the database and restart their computing to get the next hash in the chain.
 The first processor to find a hash value with the correct form to be a block chain has obtained the next synchronisation token and broadcasts this value to all other processors.
 Block chain computations are effectively synchronised; each processor starts its computations after receiving a synchronising block chain and uses all transactions submitted by the users since the computation of the received blockchain started.
  On average the computation of the block chain takes about 10 minutes.
 The block chain is computed by repeatedly computing the hash function from transaction data and additional random input until the resulting hash value has a particular form.
 However, this process is too fast to be used to compute a synchronisation token and so the computation of the hash chain in Bitcoin is done differently.
” The normal computation of a hash function in a computer would roughly take the same amount of time in each processor, which is typically much shorter than the time needed to communicate a message to all distributed processors.
In Bitcoin, this combined operation of throwing die, consolidating the database, and computing the synchronisation token is called “mining,” the distributed processor a “miner,” and the synchronisation token a “blockchain.
 In fact, Bitcoin uses a very clever trick to simultaneously update the database and randomly select which processor is the one that will generate the synchronisation token.
 In the Bitcoin system, coordination of processors can be compared to the throwing of a dice: the processor with the highest number of eyes wins and is the only one to update the database.
 For a ledger system like that of Bitcoin, coordination determines which processor has the lead in updating the database.
 determining which processor does what.
 The second aspect of the implementation of a distributed system is coordination between the processors, i.
Synchronisation between processors is essential for a distributed (database) system to work correctly.
 Each of the processors can verify that the synchronisation token is valid by recomputing the hash function.
 The synchronisation token is computed as a hash value over data that is known to every processor.
 For Bitcoin, the new data is a set of all the hash values, each computed over the details of a transaction that a user has made.
 Each distributed processor already knows the previous hash value and has also received all new data incorporated in the new hash value.
 The hash value acts as a synchronisation token sent to all distributed processors by the one consolidating processor that computed it.
 The newly computed hash value is used to securely synchronise the database copies between all the distributed processors.
 After performing an update of the database, consolidating one or more transactions, a processor computes the next hash in a hash chain with the data used in the update.
 In Bitcoin, the central database is implemented in a distributed fashion and each processor in the distributed systems maintains a copy of the full database.
 Bitcoin, on the other hand, is a ledger system in which, as at all present-day financial institutions, a central database keeps records of the amount of money a user has to spend.
 The hash value  is the equivalent of a physical coin.
 In the earlier systems the hash values are used to represent a unit value of electronic cash that is securely transferred from payer to payee.
 The use of a hash chain for securing financial data in Bitcoin, however, differs from the cases mentioned above.
As we have seen, the Bitcoin block chain follows a well-established tradition in securing data.
 Storing the hash value in a smartcard is one way of making it available for non-repudiation.
 By binding the present with the past, a hash chain can provide non-repudiation[8] for any transaction that has been recorded in the chain, as long as the most recently computed hash value is known, or available, to all parties involved in the transaction.
 Git is such a software code version control system that uses a hash chain.
 An example of such an event is the secure version control of documents like business contracts or a set of program files.
 It establishes a time line in which earlier events are being included in the chain of later event.
Using the hash chain in this way, with each new hash value in the chain adding a hash over additional input data, is a very secure way to record events.
 The chain could be extended to include any number of subsequent interactions with the smartcard.
 The hash chain was built by a sequence of hashes: the first hash sending input data to a smart card; the second hash, which was computed from the first, was changed in the card memory, and the third hash was created over the memory record and any output data.
 In the same year, this author[7] filed a patent for the use of a chain of one-way functions to protect both communication with a smart card and the operations inside it.
[6] In 2000, a hash chain was proposed to securely record the progression of operations.
 This also protects the moneys received, which are cryptographically bound to the merchant, as well as the process of redemption.
 In this electronic cash system unit values are specified by the merchant, while the security is provided by the hash chain.
 Stanford,[5] together with the present author, suggests a practical implementation for electronic cash whereby each preimage in a hash chain is used as a payment of a unit value.
This paper provides the theoretical basis for analysing the security of payments protected by a one-way chain.
 Ted Pederson,[4] working with DigiCash in the European Cafe project, describes the use of a single chain as being similar to the Lamport-chain passwords in the way it reveals a preimage with the payment of small amounts.
 For example, e-Cash, the electronic money implemented by DigiCash, uses a specially constructed tree of hash values to encode the value of a money transfer protected by a digital signature over the root of the tree.
Chains, or trees, of hash functions have been used in different proposals for the implementations of electronic money.
”A Bitcoin block chain can be seen as a combination of a Merkle-tree with a Lamport-chain: each one-way computation uses the result of the previous computation as input in order to make a chain (Lamport), and uses an additional hash value as input (Merkle) to add new data.
 The sequence of one-time passwords is called a “Lamport-chain,” or simply a “hash chain.
 Its values are sent to the user as a new sequence of one-time passwords.
 At this time a new master password is generated and a new hash chain calculated.
 Subsequently, each of the inputs to a hash computation in the chain is used as a new one-time password, until the last computation, when the master password is reached.
 The next time a password is needed the input value in the last computation is used.
 The result of the last hash computation serves as the first one-time password.
 The original random number is then stored as the master password, and the list of hash values is given to the user.
 It all starts with computing a series of hash functions, starting from a random number and subsequently using the previous function’s output as a starting point.
[3] He created a way to generate one-time passwords to secure computer logins over an insecure network.
The second approach came from Leslie Lamport.
 The final, single hash value, called the “root” of the Merkle tree, is—indirectly—a hash over all the data in the leaves.
 The tree is build by hashing each pair of leaves together and by continually pairing the results of this until a single hash value is obtained.
[1] The first approach came from Ralph Merkle,[2] who used the hash function to construct a binary “tree” of hashes with each of the “leaves” of the hashes used as a one-time-only key to create a special kind of public key signature.
The technological advances that have led to the block chain stem from two different approaches in the 1980s for repeatedly applying a cryptographic hash function.
 This short write-up attempts to demystify some of the mythical thinking around block chains.
by Eduard de JongIn the wake of the Bitcoin phenomenon, the term “block chain,” which describes a critical, technical aspect of the Bitcoin payment system, is presented by Bitcoin adherents as a technical innovation on par with the invention of the transistor, accrediting it with a similar scope of fundamental change in society.
 Suffice here to quote a French political geographer who stated that “le monde était déjà compliqué, maintenant il est devenu complexe”.
 The same applies by the way and pari passu, for the terms ‘complicated’ and ‘complex’.
 ‘Trust’ and ‘value’ make good candidates for such a game.

[4] a running joke from the glorious era of French intellectualism was that Nizan and Sartre, in their students days at the Ecole Normale Superieure, vied with each other in deconstructing the difference between ‘the notion of concept’ and ‘the concept of notion’.

[2] Keynote speech at the MoneyLab Conference, Amsterdam, 2014 See also: MoneyLab conference report
[3] One should always remember that ‘money’ (coins, notes) are legal tender, but bank deposits are not, and that their protection is moot – and above a certain sum (typically one lakh EUR/GBP/USD) non-existent.
 See also his later rejoinder on many comments.
 Yanis Varoufakis (2013), “Bitcoin and the dangerous fantasy of a-political money” (blogpost).
Notes:
[1] Or a post-industrial society for that matter.
 And in this ‘competitive market of ideas’ the algo army will no doubt make loud claims that their proof-of-work based model is the only valid approach.
 This in parallel with the distinction between alternative and complementary money models.
In the very near future we see a battle for supremacy between proof-based crypto currencies and trust-based digital currencies, aka (digital) fiat money.
 A classic instance of ‘a solution in search of a problem’, in this case, a non-working fix for something has not yet been perceived as broken (because it is not).
The unemployed algo army of fin-tech programmers, now on the move because of the hedge fund failures, will, rather sooner than later, invade the digital currency field.
 This typically constitutes the ontological blindspot of all techno-solutionism.
 Or, to put it differently: that part of human interaction that, in the end, cannot be eliminated, turns out to be paramount.
 Both the coders, miners and exchange owners appear to be exempted from this rule.
 Unfortunately, this ‘scientific evidence’ does not seem to apply to the programmers themselves.
 The human element is the weakest link in the chain that should be eliminated as much as possible.
 In (t)his view, social interaction is seen as an obstacle which should routed around.
 Satoshi was most eloquent about this: “an electronic transaction that does not rely on trust … (but should be) based instead on cryptographic proof”.
 proof
Most, if not all, advocates of crypto currencies maintain that ‘human’ trust can be effectively – and efficiently – traded for cryptographic proof.

The overlap between trust and value is of course the more interesting part of the argument.
 This will open the discussion on whether considering alternative currencies as parallel resolution instruments rather than as tokens of, well, value.
 We will then observe that for many, ‘done deals’ money is relatively irrelevant and may represent no – or even negative – net worth – as is the case of so-called ‘demurrage’ currencies.
 Since money is primarily about exchange and transfer, that is, movement, we can look at that part with relative ease when discussing various alternative monetary schemes.
 With other words, there is no such thing as intrinsic value.
The self-determined, or trust-independent, part of value, on the other hand hinges in its entirety on a subjective assessment ‘once the deal is done’.
 It is important to keep this in mind when looking at the non-libertarian alternative (digital, crypto-) currency schemes, was it only because they are usually part and parcel of alternative economic models – and because of what we just mentioned, actually fail to be really alternative.
 This has been, and still often is, the standard business practice in the East, with a remarkably low occurrence of fiduciary delinquency.
 Let’s call it ‘community trust’, which is based on post-facto enforcement, and hence trust understood as however socially constructed, security.
  There is however, a possibly far more important alternative to ‘contract trust’,  based on ex-ante verification, and thus on distrust by default, which is common both to our contracts (and contracts enforcement-)-based fiduciary systems, and to its algorithm-based so-called opposites.
 Discussing Bitcoin in Part One, we distinguished between ‘contract trust’, which, in the West, is the basis of formal financial relations, and ‘distributed trust’ the algo-based alternative system propounded by Bitcoin – and all other digital crypto-currency systems.
 For trust this is mainly about the definition stage, and the split between the different forms of money-related trust.
Seen solely in terms of money, trust and value overlap, but not entirely, so let us first look at those part that do not overlap.
 All this may appear arcane, but is fundamental to understanding the role of money as we know it, and hence also of the opportunities and limits of alternatives to money as we know it.
 And vice-versa.
 the mover) of trust or its consequence.
 In terms of money, it is problematic and unclear whether value is the cause (i.
 The complexity starts with the fact that both term overlap to a considerable extent, and, for our purpose, are both more often than not, each other’s outcome – but in which order ? [4].
As far as trust and value are concerned, they maintain a very complicated, complex relationship.

This brings us back to square one of any discussion about ‘money’:  the notions of trust and of value, and of their counterpart: responsibility, accountability, liability.
Trust, Value, and all what goes with it.
 It is already underway by (yet) tiny bits and pieces – ask Greeks or Cypriots – and Argentines before, and now again.
  We believe that a complete overhaul of the monetary system is at hand and that it will not assume the shape of an orderly reform but of a brutal overhaul.
Yet all the same, folks, “lasciate ogni speranza”: the current financial system has more or less reached the fulness its zombie stage, entered into many years ago, and this will only become more manifest in the (very?) near future.
 This line of reasoning may be technically credible (and it might not even be that, but we leave this discussion to geeks) but is politically, socially, and economically very naive.
 According to crypto-currencies advocates and developers this threat can be countered by their distributed, algorithmic models providing full-proof security against external interference and seizure.
Thus, feeling that their money has been taken hostage by finance [3], the various brands of believers in crypto-currencies have well understood that the way the financial system has evolved over the past thirty years carries the risk of a very large scale confiscation of monetary assets – it might even have this as its ultimate – albeit ‘by default’ – purpose.
 Or, with other words, the financial system has delinked itself completely from money as generally understood and used in day-to-day life by the general public, while at the same time maintaining with it a one-sided, predatory relationship which forms the basis of its undeserved, and by now, shaky, legitimacy.
 Was it only because the numbers are totally staggering, and are plainly not connected to the ‘real economy’.
Before delving deeper into the matter, we need to clear a widespread misunderstanding, recently pinpointed again by Saskia Sassen: “Finance is not about Money” [2].
 Their gripe is mostly directed at not being those who benefit from it, but the bank(st)ers and other corporates.
 A complete digitalization of currency is merely a _technical_  aspect of this trend.
 Apparently, libertarians are loath to admit that this ‘liberation’ has already happened when the financial system was, for all practical purposes, privatised in the seventies of the last century.
 The reason why crypto-currencies are so popular among libertarians of various hues is that it ‘liberates’ money from the state (other constituencies, critical of the libertarian approach, blend this perspective with their own brand of ideology or idealism).
This comes together with some remarkable disingenuousness.
 Advocates and supporters of digital solutions are unable, or unwilling, to discuss this, since  the evolution towards totally networked, ‘virtual’ systems appears so natural, evident, and anyway, inexorable.
 But even more importantly, it has also consequences going far beyond money, concerning our whole social order.
 On the technical side, there exist a large number of IT-related issues and potential glitches, which remain largely unacknowledged until exposed by various mishaps, only to be trivialized, or simply ignored.
We question the soundness of the techno-libertarian consensus
The transition from a hybrid, if by now largely digital payment system as we know today, to one which is completely and exclusively digital, is not at all unproblematic.
 We will also most likely face a welcome, if tricky embarrassment of choices of instruments to do so – with the associated range of risks.

With the ‘digerati’, however, the mantra comes with the usual shot of hi-octane techno-optimism:  theirs is the assumption that we will be able before soon to make swift and next to cost-free payments on the global level, even if that is not tomorrow.
 But for the fact that they share – with considerably less enthusiasm – the same expectations about ‘the future of money’ as the libertarian crowd, we can leave them here for the moment.
 For them, since they are reluctant to participate in its development, it is mostly about not missing the boat.
 In their view, Bitcoin, and other (crypto-)currency models are just daring frontrunners, the tech will mature, new brands will emerge, and the networked immaterial will universally prevail, in money as in many other domains.
  But ‘big ticket’ institutions, while remaining wary of such an evolution, think along the same lines.
 This is in fact already the case , but not in the way envisaged by proponents of alternate models, who want to keep things in their own hands, not those of banks or other big ticket institutions.
On the other hand, given the advances in technology, it seems safe to assume that future money and payment systems will be largely, if not exclusively digital.
” [1] It is not enough to counter this argument with the ?small is beautiful? phrase – unless, of course, one calls for a total overhaul of (or withdrawal from) the current social set-up towards ‘back to the land’ and generalised ‘de-growth’.
 As Yanis Varoufakis rightly noted “There can be no de-politicised currency capable of ‘powering’ an advanced, industrial society.
 With other words, they cannot scale up to the requirements of large and complex societies.
 As this usually goes with a longing to withdraw from the political realm these schemes irremediably condemn themselves to be either localized or focalized.
 And as most desires do when they come to the open and start to mobilize social forces, they tend to overlook disturbing realities, while focusing on the low lying fruits they believe to be within reach.
 As we wrote before about Bitcoin, alternate currency models express foremost a desire ‘for something different’, and generally in anticipation of fearful things to come, ranging to endless stagnation to total collapse.
 – we will give a description/definition of sorts later on), what unites them is the they all want to depart from the current monetary and financial system, partially or wholesale.
Call them whatever you want (‘digital cash’, ‘crypto-currencies’,  etc.
By Geert Lovink and Patrice RiemensLet’s leave Bitcoin behind and look at a whole host of other, alternate currency models alleging to complete, replace, supersede or simply exist alongside Bitcoin.
Symposium Report MoneyLab#2: Economies of DissentA big thank you to Max Dovey for all his contributions to MoneyLab#2, and for making this report.
For those of you who were there or for those who couldn’t attend: please find attached the full symposium report of MoneyLab#2: Economies of Dissent, including links to video reports.

By Max Dovey .
 Then the design and social possibly created by blockchain is hijacked and becomes a replica of the same financial system on a new platform.
 The potential fear for bitcoin believers is that the banks will successfully rebrand bitcoin to offer a safe and secure transaction system that converts the mass public into using blockchain as a form of payment.
 Similar to a firewall on the internet, where browsing becomes limited to safe and secure sites, the banks would make a crypto-currency from only recommended safe and secure sellers.
 The bitcoin and blockchain payments could change who owns financial data but a bank owned crypto-currency would not only retain that information they could potentially set the rules of what you can and cannot buy.
 With a state issued crypto-currency you could tax people for purchasing illegal substances, or deny payments for certain things altogether.
 But there interests are not purely economical.
 Scott mentions a speech by Andrew Haldane where he outlines how a state governed crypto-currency could solve current problems such as low interest rates and low economic growth.
 The Bank of England is already envisioning the potential benefits of having their own crypto-currency because it would save them so much money.
 The ideology behind bitcoin for unregulated trading and freedom from centralized control is threatened and potentially ruined by a bank owned crypto-currency.
 For many crypto-currency believers the thought of the banks using a decentralized p2p network to make a centralized trading system is fundamentally absurd.
 These crypto-currencies would be made with the same technology as bitcoin but will be centralized, privatized and managed by the banks.
 With the removal of cash money as the main currency into credit card transactions the cashless society provides endless data for every single exchange between people in society and the question becomes who should own that data? Currently banks are researching how they could use the blockchain (what bitcoin is built upon) to create their own crypto-currency.
 He highlights how much easier monitoring citizens will become through micro payments and card transactions.
comGuardian: Does a cashless society make for a surveillance state?
by Brett Scott Scott discusses the potential for mass surveillance in a cashless society and the opportunities that arise from algorithmic currencies.
      Image courtesy of  MyDoorSign.
 How could digital money be exchanged between people and places, and what kind of city would this create?.
 While you wait for your invitation, think about how you would change your city.
 Although we managed to get the short-term marriage working on our mobile phones, I think there will be a while to wait before everyone receives an invitation to create sham marriages for collective group financing.
 The numbers of people in a physical space could be counted to affect government legislation on spending – similar to the style of participatory budgeting that is being applied in Reykjavik in Iceland.
 The other workshop group used the software to connect public protest with government spending.
 Not all of the ideas suggested during the workshop gamified the city into a game of Candy Crush Saga.
 Very quickly a world is imagined where law is automated and people are governed by lines of code that use financial incentives to manage human behavior.
 It was remarkable how frequently mechanisms borrowed from popular online platforms, such as crowd-funding reward schemes or the reputation scoring of eBay or Uber are inherently incorporated into the design of smart contract systems.
When given the opportunity to use money to direct, govern and manipulate behavior in public space many of the suggestions put forward seemed more oppressive than liberating to our access, rights and freedom in open space.
 When one overlooks the novelty aspects of the idea, I think there is a valid proposal (!) for creating self-reliant commitments amongst peers, similar to the concept of p-2-p insurance platform CommonEasy; where friends financially protect each one another via an online social network platform.
 We adapted the practical and functional aspects of marriage into the Geocoin platform to enable impromptu financial commitments between people in public space.
 Arranged marriages, short term fixed marriages or visa weddings all utilize the contract to secure wealth, security or freedom between different parties.
 Marriage, with all its connotations, can be whittled down to one of the oldest forms of contract that binds two people from two families to create financial security.
Although the video demonstration mimics the guileless technological solutionist style that has become notorious with Silicon Valley start up culture, I believe the proposition of temporary shared funds between people in public space, is note-worthy for adapting the marriage contract into a handy, mobile temporary service.
 Eventually we eventually arrived at marriage as a contract and a social economic bond that we wanted to appropriate from church and state and adapt it into a temporary mobile agreement that could be made anywhere, anytime with a mobile application connected to the blockchain.
 After negotiating some more ludic suggestions that used smart contracts to create temporary special economic zones in public space that we called ‘Tax Happy Hours’.
 The opportunity to re-configure how digital money can be circulated within cities with the use of smart contracts did evoke some fairly questionable propositions that used the phrase ‘We can make people do this’.
Being able to distribute money around a city to members of the public raises complex debates that cannot be solved by the roll of a dice.
 Gaining the power to distribute and allocate money to citizens through their physical presence in different public places connected the psychogeography of urban cities with the free-market utopia of Bitcoin.
 This is when the seemingly arbitrary locations (hospital, supermarket) began to have significant propositions towards the economic role of the citizen in a city.
 Once we all returned we were given a more comprehensive explanation towards the relationship between the locations and amount of coins in our digital wallet.
 After narrowly avoiding bikes and trams while staring at the radiating place marks on my phone I eventually began to see how these locations were increasing or decreasing a number at the bottom of the screen that indicated the balance of my Bitcoin wallet.
 Just as the participants looked as if they were beginning to make sense of blockchain transactions and unregulated market trading, we were all allocated phones, sim cards, and sent outside to follow some dots on a map.
 I ended up swapping three sheep for a sponsored tweet endorsing the workshop before deciding to invest all my money into a collective pension fund with some of my peers.
Popular misconceptions were ironed out as the game evolved into more open trading between the players and the freedom of unregulated currency began to inspire some radical propositions.
 Re-enacting the confusing computational processes of blockchain transactions with Lego was very helpful for the group to find a common language and articulate their thoughts on this new type of digital, unregulated exchange.
 Whilst the majority of the group exchanged natural resources between each other, two people were assigned to perform the computer ‘mining’ – the cryptographic method used for verifying transactions – by solving countdown style math calculations.
 As these pieces of Lego gradually built upwards like a game of Tetris, the towering structure was a material representation of the digital structure of the blockchain ledger.
 We re-enacted transactions on the blockchain by exchanging different resources (wood, oil, water) and recording those transactions by signing our initials on small pieces of Lego that we placed onto a large block.
 What kind of trades do you want to facilitate? How can capital be circulated around the city in alternative ways? How do these alternative financial experiments change the behaviors of people in public space?Fortunately we were primed with some small experiments within the workshop to prepare us towards developing our own game with the Geocoin software.
 But this sudden sense of power was hindered by some stubborn social and ethical implications that immediately arose from discussing alternative economic exchanges within the city.
 When we were offered the chance to construct our own game, with our own rules in this world and suddenly we felt like overlords of the city, finding ways to launder digital currency to influence the cities population with our very own Bitcoin Monopoly.
 Why should I loose money by visiting the hospital and be offered financial incentives to shop at Albert Heijn?Experimenting with Geocoin created a sensation not dissimilar to that of buying houses and hotels on a Monopoly board and taxing your opponents for landing on different zones.
 By simply changing the rules you could create entirely different social economic constructs.
 But even these basic examples carried immense political and economic significance.
 These basic examples demonstrated how blockchain technology could be integrated into physical places in the city to enable locative-based design that explores alternative distributions of value or exchange.

For example, whilst I could earn Bitcoins by standing outside Albert Heijn, I lost money by visiting the hospital.
 It does this by creating ‘hotspots’; areas highlighted on open street maps that have a direct affect to the balance in your Bitcoin wallet.
 The platform uses gps technology to map and circulate digital currencies within cities (currently Bitcoin, but could be used for any crypto-currency).
 We were taking part in a two day workshop led by Chris Speed from the Design Informatics department at Edinburgh University, who had invited us to design games on a new platform they had developed called Geocoin.
 The marriages were part of a demonstration to show how smart contracts and blockchain technology can create user-generated contracts between strangers.
eu/Last week I got married in Amsterdam, twice in fact.
eu/programme/lab-of-labs/blockchain-city/http://designandthecity.


A short review from Blockchain City workshop organised as part of Design and The City Conference 19 – 22 April 2016http://designandthecity.
 Stay posted for more announcements, calls for proposals and collaborations – for further information please contact max@networkcultures.
 A two-day symposium will be accompanied by a series of workshops from art collectives, designers and activists featuring investigations into artist contracts, experiments in digital publishing, artist revenue platforms, p-2-p co-operatives, and experiments in universal basic income.
 As the values of the commons are incorporated, manipulated and brandished by both business models and co-operatives alike, how should we reflect on and manage our relationship to the often-idealized notion of the commons? As businesses and co-operations increasingly advance towards de-centralized, p-2-p business models what are the core values associated with the commons that we want to retain and permeate into wider social movements?Moneylab#3: Failing Better is scheduled for 1–2 December 2016, again in Amsterdam.
 Amidst a fresh wave of digital initiatives that focus on shared collective resources, that range from car-pooling to collective farming, the sharing and social support upheld within the commons has spilled into commercial ventures that see the virtue of the commons as the essence to a better future.
’ What happens when life imitates finance art? Can artists’ investigations into finance create viable alternatives for the masses?Session 5: Whose Commons?‘Whose Commons’ is a timely examination of the commons as ideological battleground.
 We present works that reflect on the endemic characteristics of the 21st-century economy, and that initiate alternative value systems, from designing stock trading algorithms, to occupying private banks to eating and digesting of pages from ‘Das Kapital.
‘When Art Mirrors Marx’ presents a selection of artists that invert and disassemble the intrinsic value of art to re-imagine the scope of artistic production and distribution.
 Moneylab#3 invites artists from diverse backgrounds and disciplines to present research, experiments and interventions into finance.
 Artists have been monitoring, tracking and intervening into finance to provide new insights and potential escape routes.
How does this play in the ever-growing festival and club scene? What is the vision for a global industry that now relies on counting streaming playbacks and selling hand-made band t-shirts? Can the outcry for alternatives be met with distribution platforms that disrupt the dominant players and reach larger audiences? And how is the club scene itself being affected by the ongoing real-estate boom in the metropolitan areas, usually seen as the birthplace of new music currents?Session 4: When Art Mirrors MarxArtists are vital to de-constructing how finance and economics have affected our collective imagination, and to re-imagine alternatives.
 In addition to this, public performances are now monetized with the use of audio recognition technology in music venues, turning bars, clubs and festivals into sites of data-based economic revenue for major publishers and labels.
 Traditional rights management laws continue to restrict the creation, distribution and profitability of music.
What alternatives to electronic money can prevent citizen surveillance and inspire radical visions of the future of money?Session 3: The Music Industry: The Last Dance?The music industry is still in repair after the initial disruption of digital downloads and streaming sites in the mid 1990s.
 The financial upheaval and internal reconfiguration of monetary transaction provides an optimum moment to discuss the future of money and digital banking.
 FBI backdoor encryption case has highlighted the mounting tensions between commercial and governmental data surveillance.
 These concerns echo wider debates around data and surveillance – the Apple vs.
 As more and more shops and retailers in large cities reject cash in favor of electronic money, important issues regarding privacy, data and surveillance become central to the future of money.
 In a world without cash, every payment becomes traceable, allowing for unprecedented amounts of data to be collected on citizens.
Session 2: Big Pocket is Watching You!The explosion of new forms of alternate currencies and the persistent refusal to do away with physical cash indicates growing public concern over the way in which electronic monetary exchange enables large scale data surveillance.
 As scores of citizens amass in public squares as part of Nuit Debout or campaign for political reform with people’s parties such as Podemos or the Five Star Movement, will the original underlying critique against global finance retain its sense of urgency? How has popular economic critique propelled or even overshot its evaluation of the financial crisis? Can popular economic literature engage directly with the current social movements to become, more than just a conversation piece, but a potential manual to reroute the austerity economy.
ProgramSession 1: Global Finance: Failing Better? Beyond the culture of celebs, what comes after Ewald Engelen, Thomas Piketty, Yanis Varoufakis and David Graeber? How can we build bridges between economists and their critique of global finance, neo-liberal policies, financialization, shrinking middle classes and the ever-growing gap between rich and poor? Can we address the gap between the best selling financial book of the year and grass-roots social resistance?‘Global Finance: Failing Better?’ addresses the need for a multitude of critical strategies that go beyond analysis and step up the game into action.
 Let’s prefabricate a perfect storm of untimely thinking and experimental engineering in order to interfere directly into hard-core social and economic issues.
 Issues of trust, scale, distribution and ownership remain at the core of developing alternative models of economic exchange and governance and need to be addressed.
The search for economic forms of governance in the service of the commons remains urgent.
 This momentum has thrust radical economic alternatives into the central stage and governments around Europe have begun experimenting with progressive policies such as a living working wage and a universal basic income.
 People’s parties such as Podemos and 15M even neared an electoral majority.
 The aspirations of grassroots organizations such as Diem25, that promise to liberate social democracy from the stronghold of global finance, are gaining momentum across Europe.
 Worker’s unions are on the rise and numerous collectives are working together to collectively insure their own wellbeing and build alternative models of social governance.
We are failing better, nonetheless.
 Meanwhile, the financial mediators of the previous centuries continue to drag themselves onward into global debt.
 Despite the escalation of crowd-funding into crowd-equity and platform co-operatives, artists and designers struggle to financially support themselves.
 Meanwhile the sharing and “service” economy lost its innocuous veneer and streaming services have failed and continue to fold the music industry.
Amsterdam, December 1 & 2, 2016Organized by the Institute of Network Cultures (HvA)Introduction After Bitcoin forked, and remains in tatters, it is now blockchain technology that ignites visions of de-regulated and decentralized organization, all the while it is simultaneously being sanitized by commercial banks.
*SAVE THE DATE* A collective attempt to fail better with artists, critics and activists that are all feeling the pinch.
 Taylor, Tiziana Terranova, Nathaniel Tkacz, Pablo Velasco González, Akseli Virtanen and Beat Weber.
Contributors:Irwan Abdalloh, Franco “Bifo” Berardi, Robert van Boeschoten, Finn Brunton, Paolo Cirio, Jim Costanzo, Primavera De Filippi, Eduard de Jong, Irina Enache, Andrea Fumagalli, David Golumbia, Max Haiven, Keith Hart, Samer Hassan, Ralph Heidenreich, Stefan Heidenreich, Geert Lovink, Bill Maurer, Rachel O’Dwyer, Pekka Piironen, Lena Rethel, Renée Ridgway, Andrew Ross, Stephanie Rothenberg, Douglas Rushkoff, Saskia Sassen, Inge Ejbye Sørensen, Lana Swartz, Erin B.
 At stake is the full spectrum of technologies of economic (re)distribution.
 It is not always clear, for instance, whether genuine alternatives are unfolding or if we are simply witnessing the creative extension of neoliberalism.
 The authors of this volume discuss the implications of the current architecture of global finance, its impact on ever-growing income disparity, and question money and finance as such.
The MoneyLab Reader brings developments in crowdfunding, currency design, technologies of payment, and other economic experiments into dialogue.
 Get your copy here.
 The E-Pub of the Reader will follow shortly.
The print edition of the MoneyLab Reader: An Intervention in Digital Economy is now available.
 Rather than look for more ways to incriminate cryptography and encryption it is an opportune moment to start looking at cryptography and blockchain technology to force financial corporations to become accountable and transparent when it comes to paying their taxes.
 There are already some exciting possibilities unfolding – for example a snap election in Iceland would potentially give the Pirate Party a full majority in parliament (boingboing).
 It is not the shock but the scale of the Panama Papers that will hopefully lead to some changes to accountability and financial transparency.
 Another common and equally disheartening comment I have heard is ‘they were doing it all along and now we know’, which is akin to the type of response you would say to someone or something you already distrust and expected no less.
 Although I hope this isn’t the case his comments reflect not only the (dis)belief in law & governance to reprimand this type of behavior but the way in which governments use these opportunities to implement increased network surveillance to prevent cryptographic or encrypted communication that facilitate this type of information to be made public in the first place.

Andreas Antonopoulos, a bitcoin entrepreneur, seconds this notion by predicting that the Panama Papers will lead to further criminalization of cryptography and bans on bitcoin rather than any judicial sentencing for the individuals or organizations involved.
 This results in what Evgeny Morozov describes as the ‘crisis of legitimization’, which can be seen as the impotence of social democracy to operate under global capitalism and the expansion and outsourcing of state governance to global tech firms and share economy applications.
 As the regular line-up of global corporations and startled politicians use this event to repeatedly state ‘they are not legally doing anything wrong’, they will continue to take no responsibility for the ethical and moral damages that these actions have on the relation between citizen and state.
 More news on the systematic scale of money laundering and institutional tax evasion will continue to erode our collective sense of ethical and moral understanding and perpetuate further disdain and distrust towards governments and banks.
On a more general note, I believe the scale of the Panama Papers will have a much longer and sustained effect on social democracy and trust between citizen and state.
 Such reduced headlines lead to more simplified narratives that are not adequate enough responses to the scale of systematic corruption that the Panama Papers will eventually reveal.
 By making the information public you can extend the creative response to the event that will go guther than flashy headlines and into the collective imagination of society.
 The info graphic visual culture that has become the typical way to communicate this type of information will blend into the media backdrop along with a handful of nervous politicians and phony businesses that will similarly retreat out of the spotlight of public scrutiny.
 In a few days the Panama Papers headline will pass and the core team at ICIJ will be whittling through the stack of data verifying names, making connections and legitimizing the classified information in over 149 million files.
 These projects are examples of artists using leaked public information as material to provoke and interrogate further debate around the subject of tax evasion and money laundering.
 Or the actions of artists Núria Güell & Levi Orta who as part of their ‘Arte Político Degenerado’ series created a tax haven with artist money expropriated from Spanish banks.
com the artist lists and sells certificates of ownership for different letterbox companies on the Cayman Islands.
Paolo Cirio and his project loophole4all.
 We are interested in artists who are tracing the methods and models used in financial corruption to produce their own interventions and creative interpretations of these actions.
 At Moneylab we aim to further the creative response to such events beyond the simple info-graphic into interventions, actions and public discussion.
 A much richer investigation and interpretation of these events could be conducted through direct access to the documents.

Without access to the source, the public is left to interpret these events through ‘newsworthy’ headlines and informative info- graphics.
 The protection of Whiteblowers and journalists should be top priority and there must be other ways of distributing the core files such as this to a wider audience without sending them off to the mainstream press one by one.
 All the data must be manually checked by a small team at ICIJ because if they were to release it into the wild as is they would face similar reprimands to Edward Snowden or Chelsea Manning.
 The manual process of censoring legally sensitive information to protect themselves from minor infringements of personal data, while simultaneously uncovering such large scale illicit practices highlights the absurd methods that have to be taken to make such information public.
ICIJ is forced to control the distribution to ensure no names or addresses go into public circulation that could lead to expensive legal cases or prosecution from any pissed off billionaires indicted in the Panama Papers.
org so far, 149 or 11 million have been checked, censored and uploaded.
 Once files are verified and appropriately censored by ICIJ they are uploaded to documentcloud.
6tb to be made publicly accessible, however, according to the ICIJ, this cannot be done until all the personal information has been censored or removed.
 I share a desire with many others for the full 2.
 In the case of the Panama papers they are currently held on behalf of the ICIJ (The International Consortium of Investigative Journalists).
 Information initially gets ‘leaked’ to a specific media organization that then holds the rights to sharing it with other media outlets who are willing to help analyze and publish the information.
His presentation highlights how using ‘follow the money’ tactics the OCCRP uncovers money laundering and financial corruption on a large scale and at great risk and danger to the journalists and reporters involved.
 At Moneylab#2 Paul Radu from the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project gave an in-depth over view about uncovering and reporting on money laundering.
As journalists beginning methodologically scanning and analyzing the millions of documents it is worth considering the methods and distribution of this type of information.
 So far much of the Western press has been focused on the Icelandic prime minister, Sigmundur Gunnlaugsson, and Vladimir Putin, while we anticipate much more sensitive information will be revealed over the coming weeks I want to evaluate some of the methods of financial journalism and speculate on some of the potential consequences of the Panama Papers.
6tb of data extracting recognizable names that have been hiding billions of dollars in lucrative locations with farcical letterbox companies.
Yesterday evening journalists began to emerge from the depths of 2.
 If D-cent software continues to aid the fast moving expansion of national people’s parties like 5m movement in Italy, Podemos in Spain and Diem25 in Europe than perhaps a ‘technocratic socialism’ can facilitate a mobilized left that is networked and more visibly recognizable within European politics.
 It is naive to believe in a solely technical solution to a social or political problem, however after learning about the successful adaption of D-cent software into some of the largest European political parties I anticipate wider use of D-cent software, from the office workplace to the occupied streets.
 Facing this crisis of socialist values the question is whether open-source applications such as D-cent can redesign social democracy from the bottom up.
 This expansion, over the past half a century, has left citizens with very little neutral space both online and offline, which causes Morovoz to argue that social democracy is (nearly) dead.
 Why do the majority of blockchain applications and smart contracts enforce propriety ownership such as copyright and intellectual property? How did the values of the commons get coerced into share economy services that are driven towards market domination? The commercialization of the WWW in the data driven economy has expanded the free market into citizens’ thoughts and fingertips.
 However, he argues that historically, the right have a much better track record for exploiting computer software to their advantage and Morozov asks why socialists have not (yet) been able to create a crypto-currency that is not rooted in anarchic-capitalist ideology.
 That optimism lies in software such as D-cent galvanizing the left to self-organize socialist and people’s parties.
 Morozov insists that after many years of cynically ridiculing the liberal Californian optimism of ‘making apps to save the world’, he is now adopting a positive perspective towards software, applications and online platforms that attempt to build a more democratic society.
 He spoke of his concerns with technocratic governmentality and how socialist values have been absorbed into a neo-liberal, libertarian social code that dominates Western culture.
I am not alone in my irrational fear towards technological solutionism as Evgeny Morozov, writer of ‘The Net Delusion’ (2011) and ‘To Save Everything, Click Here’ (2013) spoke at length on technocratic bureaucracy.
 This prospect of more participatory applications that promise to save time and increase workload efficiency, but end up turning into endless negotiation and, in office workplaces, into discussions about the size of the water cooler, or voting on where to go to lunch, is not something I am excited about.
 While I am excited to hear about all the political ventures D-cent has served for noteworthy causes, there is always the unfortunate possibility that these promising tools will be implemented in less worthy causes such as improving time management and employee engagement in the workplace.
 Any organization that wants to facilitate consensus democratic decision-making through software can fork and implement D-cents’ code.
 It is no surprise that software geared towards social engagement and consensus decision-making could be applicable in many sectors – schools, hospitals, and offices.
 Some of the consensus based voting tools presented by D-cent share similarities with the time saving office management applications such as ‘Doodle’ where people indicate their availability by voting for different dates.
 The values that these digital tools promote, encouraging engagement and participation through consensus decision-making can also be used in technocratic office management applications to acquire further information about employees interests and wellbeing.
While listening to Natalie Eskinazi from Thoughtworks I noticed the long list of private firms they consult for and considered the expansive potential that these new tools for democracy carry for office management, workplaces and human resources.
 While I can see its advantages there should be consideration into how these small changes to democratic procedure are giant shifts in the relation of power and social order.
 Secure, unique identities are required for online democratic systems and although nobody is sure yet how secure blockchain is, the common view is that its p2p infrastructure makes it an unquestionable improvement on the current government system.
 This last point highlights how these slight, technical fixes for democratic procedure represent giant shifts in social structures and hierarchical power orders.
 The long-term concerns are not just privacy and security related but question whether you would be more comfortable storing your data on a de-centralized p2p database (blockchain), It weighs up between a private tech firm probably based in San Francisco or in a government office.
 The time saved looking up endless passwords for different accounts is an immediate benefit of a unique identification tool and it would put your national identity at the core of your online experience.
 Instead of using your Facebook account to login to an online service, you could use your government identity for multiple platforms selected by you.
 A login identification tool presented by D-cent and Thoughtworks called ‘StoneCutter’ attempts to address this issue by creating a single encrypted identity that can be used across multiple platforms.
 She argued that our online identity could be equally unique and expressive as our social media profiles which would encourage a stronger relationship between the user (citizen) and the interface (the government).
 Marleen Sticker from Waag Society reflected on her experiences with the Dutch national identification administration system and highlighted the difficulty in locating and accessing essential government services through the design of the DigiD interface.
         There was time spent addressing some of the technical systems already in place, for example the basic, counter intuitive design of government online platforms such as the Dutch platform ‘DigiD’.
 From what I understand this is what most of D-cent’s digital toolkit for social democracy is building, working alongside and supporting the needs and requirements of some of the peoples movements that are already using these approaches to improve democratic procedure and change policy making.
 If these new technological services are going to serve the state (and benefit the people) it is important that they are not for profit, geared towards the commons and politically neutral as possible! In technical terms that should mean that the software should be open source and not a propriety private company such as ‘Smartmatic’, collectively self managed (not by one administrator, but many), publicly transparent and accessible.
 However the prospective transition to online democratic platforms should be carefully observed in order to prevent the public falling into the arms of (more) private companies that will not only continue to capitalize on their data, but use it to write and enforce law.
 Whilst saying this I completely agree with many of the people’s parties that believe that democratic procedures such as voting are in dire need of a factory reset.
 The outsourcing of government tasks is partly due to lack of resources to govern in an expanding global economy but also the neo-liberal logic that the most efficient way to do this is through private consultancy firms like ‘SmartMatic’ that consequently end up reducing the dwindling power and responsibility of the welfare state.
 Take for example the multinational tech firm ‘Smartmatic’ that is apparently providing ‘clean, honest voting’ via digital integration with the blockchain and in March was used as the method for voting on the US primaries in Utah (coinfox).
 The idea that anything must be better than the current political system motivates a large number of dissatisfied people to develop alternatives that add to a range of technical solutions to fix broken political procedures.
        The concerns that come out of these movements are that of data privacy and trust, what happens when your political party stores your digital information and can the current dysfunctional relationship between citizen and state authority transition to that of trust and mutual dependence.
 It is important to understand the context that has given birth to these recent developments and to discuss the potential consequences of some of the technical applications that are being developed by D-cent to aid social democracy and citizen empowerment.
 This belief is also apparent in the European movement lead by Yanis Varoufakis with the claim that ‘The EU will either be democratized or it will disintegrate!’ (Diem25) These various movements all are representative of a post 2008 financial crash attitude towards alternative forms of governance that give more responsibility to representative forms of democracy that use the internet to aid consensus based policy making.
(Wikpedia, 5 star movement)The five star movement explicit credits the internet for enabling direct democracy to support collective organization and direct action.
 They will succeed only by creating a collective intelligence made possible by the internet.
 The idea is that citizens will no longer delegate their power to parties, considered old and corrupted intermediates between the State and themselves, that serve the interests of lobby groups and financial powers.
        The movement bases its principles on direct democracy as an evolution of representative democracy.
 For example Podemos is now the third largest party in Spain and The Five Star movement in Italy is now the second largest party and use the internet to mobilize and support what they call ‘direct democracy’.
 Although these movements are geographically dispersed from Spain to Iceland, it is encouraging to discover they are not solely minor fringe parties and some have amassed into large national parties.
 Jaromil Rojo, one of the project developers, provided a brief overview of different D-cent tools in action in different political parties across Europe –• Barcelona: Participation Platform
• Reykjavik: Participatory budgeting platform
• Helsinki: Tracking municipal 
• Madrid: Open consultation and direct democracy platformThe tools used by these political organizations range from participatory budgeting, where members vote on what the party spends its money on, to crowd sourced policy making, where members collaboratively edit documents that become legislation or party policy.
 The questions that arise are those of provenance and scale – is it possible to design technological fixes to social problems and if so how do these solutions scale up from grass roots movements to empower and serve the masses?    The work of D-cent project displayed extensive research into this issue and it was inspiring to discover how far some of D-cent’s projects had manifested and even infiltrated and spread to different European regions to support a networked democracy.
 The aftereffects of events such as this one leave the collective belief in democracy in shards and the next step is to go about resolving some of the deficiencies of democracy as a medium to change political systems.
 The ineffectiveness of such Syriza –a grass roots people’s party – to implement the demands of it’s citizens at a time of such severe crisis tarnished the belief that democracy is adequately capable of representing the people and highlighted how it falls victim to, and serves the needs of the global market.
 After the collective ‘no’ was overruled by further economic sanctions by the IMF, Tsipras’s government was publicly denounced as ineffective under the powers of EU and the International Monetary fund (IMF).
 This was made visibly explicit in Greece, which recorded it’s lowest ever turnout to vote on the EU bailout referendum in July 2015 (62%).
 This is an urgent issue, as many citizens are disillusioned with political systems that they see as inadequate bureaucratic organizations suffering to the demands of global finance.
 This ranged from local to national policies that make use of online platforms and networked devices to create a more active democratic system for the 21st century.
 Much of the focus was on designing software that empowers and encourages citizens to engage with and participate in politics.
U funded project by D-Cent titled ‘Digital Tools for a Social Democracy’.
 The evening predominantly showcased outcomes of a two-year E.
‘Decentralizing Democracy – on our terms’ was organized and hosted by Waag Society  on 8th March 2016

On Wednesday 8th March Waag society invited a selection of speakers to discuss democracy and digital software.
 He tweets at @EnricDuranG and @Fair_Coop.
Since much of the talk was omitted by technical issues, here’s a long read by vice magazine that gives a good further introduction into the sphere and projects around Enric Duran.
 With this connecting layer, he hopes that different alternative currencies can work together and build the structures of an other economic system.
 Duran is part of Fair Coop, which aims to develop reliable p2p transactions.
 Duran stressed that a blockchain system needs to be developed that “bears all the needs of all the [grassroots] projects that [we] are working on”, so they can collaborate.
For Duran big hopes go out to the blockchain, a technology that allows a network to track transactions meticulously and which makes possible to have unique transactions in an anonymous network.
 Using the example of Cooperativa Catalana, he explained that though complete autonomy is desired by many participators in building an alternative community, a link to other currencies like the Euro or Dollar still needs to be maintained.
In his talk, Duran spoke about the necessity for grassroots movements to establish their own legal system and an autonomous currency in order to help develop a desired an alternative economic system to the current capitalist hegemonies.
 Skype technology appeared to be once again extremely vulnerable to interference; some minutes of his talk had to be spent eliminating sources of noise.
 The MoneyLab audience gazed onto the white walls before which Duran stood out, projected on the screen via Skype, speaking about the role of money and liquidity in grassroots movements.
 “I Will be online […]” Enric Duran tweeted three days before the conference, and he was.
000, which, allegedly, he donated to grassroots movements, he could not attend the conference in person.
By Felix ClasbrummelBeing known as the ‘Robin Hood of banks’ and being searched for by the Spanish government for taking out funds of Spanish banks worth more than €500.
Read the rest of the entry here, on the ROARmag website.
 The one aspect they all agreed on is the wealth of ideas they are exposed to by bringing together the most interesting artists, thinkers, entrepreneurs, students, writers and designers who share their insights and ideas from their respective backgrounds on a common topic: the economy and the future of money.
What makes MoneyLab a valuable project? Throughout the MoneyLab#2: Economies of Dissent symposium we asked speakers and audience what they think of the talks, discussions, workshops and art projects presented.
 Over the last two years, he has been running the Art Reserve Bank, hoping to provide an alternative to one of the fundamental problems of the bank crisis.
 His projects could be described as rather remarkable happenings, which, in a serious but playful way, invite the viewer to reflect on social and economic matters.
Ron Peperkamp is an artist and the managing director of the Art Reserve Bank.
Applications: if you are interested please send your resume and cover letter to vera [at] networkcultures [dot] org by February 20 2016.
Monthly compensation €320 (0,6 fte) / € 400 (0,8 fte)For further information you can contact Patricia de Vries: patricia [at] networkcultures [dot] org or check our website.
 You balance a desire to learn, take initiative and suggest better practices and take constructive feedback.
 In addition, you have strong writing and communication skills, and experience with social media management and web administration.
Internship duties vary but include:Research & Writing tasks:
• Write literature reviews on subjects related to MoneyLab project
• attend project related events
• collect interesting and relevant literature
• identify possible partners, speakers, artists and related projects
• assist the program committee with writing the program
• write contributions for the MoneyLab project blog
• Update the project websiteProduction and communication tasks:
• logistical support, partner identification; liaison with partners and speakers
• Assisting INC staff with project- and event-related pre-production and development support (ie location, accommodation and catering scouting)
• targeted promotion activitiesOther tasks include:
• assist with general office operations
• attend meetings
• work as part of the organizational teamAs the INC has an international scope, active English skills are required, in speaking and writing.
We are looking for an enthusiastic, energetic, inquisitive (former) student with knowledge of and a demonstrated interest in MoneyLab related topics.
 The aim of the event is to focus on how creative engineering and creative thinking can directly interfere into hard-core economic debates and help tackle issues of trust, social concerns, scale and security in order to help foster and proliferate alternative models of revenue, exchange and distribution for artists and creative content.
This coming Fall the INC hosts the third MoneyLab conference in Amsterdam.
 It provides a platform for multi-disciplinary dialogues between a variety of people and initiatives, both commercial and non-commercial, to work on economic alternatives in digital economy.
MoneyLab is a network of researchers, artists, hackers and entrepreneurs and other creators that take up the call for critical and creative experiments with and interventions into alternative forms of exchange, ownership and the distribution of value.
Internship period: March 1 until July 1 2016 (0.
The Institute of Network Cultures is looking for an intern with writing, research and production skills, for the organisation of MoneyLab#3 and overall project management support of the MoneyLab project.
Franco Berardi concluded his talk with an example from the recently released Spike Jonze film “Her”, saying that humanity needs to work on the problem of automation of linguistic interaction – “the real process which is giving sense or taking sense from our life, our struggle, our process of understanding”.
 These are the main elements that can help develop alternative economies.
 Mentioning the Occupy movement again, Berardi argued that alternative currencies do not have a technical problem or a software one, but a problem of solidarity and trust.
 However, the latter represent the only possibility of coming out from the ‘old fashioned territorial’.
 The other direction contains Bitcoin and all crypto/digital currencies, that are ‘much more frightening’.
 One is territorial – the local exchange, trading, exemplified by mentioning Ithaca Hours and other alternative currencies in Italy.
 In regards to alternative currencies, Franco Berardi sees two main directions.
Next, Berardi talked about insolvency and what it means for him, arguing that he considers the process is an equivalent for social solidarity.
 The problem of these past 50 years of political, social and cultural life is the possibility of automation, as Berardi raises the question whether automation is ‘the solution to get out of the induced labour or is actually the chain which is going to enslave us’.
 This can be considered the central issue of the last 50 years.
 Berardi claimed we are witnessing the final implementation of automation.
’Furthermore, Berardi discussed a few concepts, beginning with automation; in his approach, this not a new word yet it’s taking a new meaning in our age – a final meaning.
 Berardi described the Occupy movement as a ‘self affirmation of the body against the rationale of abstraction in the financial sphere – the final avatar or manifestation, an attempt to deconstruct the financial automation of social life.
Franco Berardi started his presentation by linking the subject of money and alternative currencies to the Occupy movement, whose tonality and intentions, in his opinion, had a lot to do with hacking the future of money.
”Amsterdam, November 30, 2015(The authors thank Boudewijn de Kerf for a quick review, while keeping
full responsibility for the substance of the argument.
Conclusion: As Yanis Varoufakis, the economist and former finance minister in Greece, formulated it: “Bitcoin is not capable of ‘powering’ an advanced, industrial society.
 For Bitcoin to ‘scale up’ to a true global scale, while maintaining (a semblance of) stability and security would for quite some time to come require such large amount of resources as to defeat any short or medium term perspective of attainability.
 In these cases it has been  a mediator between traditional monetary systems.
As shown in Argentina or Greece  Bitcoin can be useful in some specific situations.
, VISA, Mastercard, AmEx, JCB and such.
For consumer payment transactions,  for instance, it is hard to conceive how the  blockchain protocol in Bitcoin can be made to  operate effectively at the same speed and volume as systems maintained by, e.
 In the absence of governance of bitcoin, even a technical modification to increase transaction capacity are very hard to implement.
”Both the limited number of possible units of bitcoins and  inherently severe technical limits to the operational speed of the blockchain protocol pose such insurmountable obstacles to a global economy that would run exclusively with bitcoins.
 “Bitcoin can scale to world size.
 This contrasts with traditional financial institutions that can reduce energy consumption a pace with improvements in IT technology.
Conclusion: Bitcoin does not fit well in the required transition to sustainability.
 This clearly is at variance with the ever more forceful, and inescapable calls for less consumption, foremost in the energy sector.
”The whole Bitcoin set-up is, and especially the functioning of the distributed implementation of its central database with the compute-intensive blockchain protocol, is dependent on increasingly sophisticated and trouble-free network infrastructure resulting in an ever increasing consumption of resources.
 “Bitcoin is a sustainable system.
Conclusion: like any other monetary system, Bitcoin, in its technical design reflects explicit or implicit political choices.
 Conversely, it is difficult to imagine how Bitcoin could effectively function in a capitalism-unfriendly political dispensation.
Other characteristic Bitcoin features, such as it rewards for early adopters and big operators, its essentially deflationary and hoarding-inducing nature (also due to the designed scarcity of bitcoins), its rejection of regulatory oversight and consumer protection and of state intervention generally, all resonate with political beliefs of “techno-libertarians”.
 The  decision that is embodied in Bitcoin’s design  to limit the issuable volume of bitcoins to 21 million units can only be seen as political.
 In this context politics must be understood as more than what politicians do, essential politics is about the citizens and the state they live in.
”British prime minister Margaret Thatcher, in a famous ‘last words’ speech against the Euro, affirmed that decisions about money and currency are all essentially political in nature.
 “Bitcoin is politically neutral.
Conclusion: Bitcoin substitutes one form of ‘subjective’ trust in traditional institutions for another in new organizational forms.
 Making use of ‘wallet providers’ evidently entails trust in the continued correct and honest operations of the online service or of the physical device.
 This service can be provided both online and with physical tokens like smart cards.
 As a consequence, Bitcoin service providers have emerged offering enhanced payment security, in the form of managing their clients’ wallets.
Also, protection of the stored value at the level of the individual owner is not very strong in the Bitcoin set-up.
 Users engaging in Bitcoin transactions implicitly trust that the miner programs continues to operate correctly, that the equipment is protected against virus attacks and that the miners will not subvert it.
 by a virus, or by a miner intent on undue gains.
  This program  includes verification of transactions, but transaction verification by the miner program might be compromised either accidentally, by a software bug, or maliciously, e.
 Most processing nodes that update the database, use the same open source implementation, the Bitcoin ‘miner’ program.
As described previously, the blockchain protocol used to synchronize updates to the Bitcoin central database (or ledger) does not guarantee the correctness of the updates made.
”Bitcoin literature is adamant that the Bitcoin set-up successfully substitutes ‘objective’ ‘algorithmic’ trust for less reliable, because human error and trickery-prone, ‘subjective’ institutional or political trust.
 “Bitcoin operates without trust.
Conclusion: using Bitcoin is more risky than the traditional payment infrastructure.
 The blockchain protocol cannot prevent that fraudulent transactions get recorded, and does not provide a way to remove or correct fraudulent transactions.
 The protocol does also not guarantee that a processing node actually verifies the transactions it records.
By design, the blockchain protocol does not guarantee that all past transactions remain stored for ever or can be available to each of the processing nodes (miners) for inspection in a fail-safe way.
 with a virus) and the continued operations can therefor not be guaranteed.
 Yet, servers can be hacked (e.
 The software in each of the processing nodes must verify the correctness of the transactions by inspecting previous transactions where the payer has received the value to be spend.
 This is required to correctly incorporate the payment transactions made since the last update.
On the functional side, the operators of the processing nodes in the distributed implementation of the shared Bitcoin database  use an  protocol, to  agree on the next version of the database.
For the ordinary user, this represents a much higher level of risk than in traditional banking, where losing the bank card or PIN does usually not result in losing the whole balance held in the bank account.
 Indeed one of the design features of Bitcoin is that payments, once made, cannot be reversed or recalled.
 A loss of the private key, for instance by a crashed hard disk, does not just lose access to the money, it actually loses all the moneys controlled.
 Yet, computers can be hacked, and a hacker can gain control of the private key and hence initiate a fraudulent payment.
 The password unlocks a private cryptographic key stored on the computer to send cryptographically protected messages to be recorded in the Bitcoin database to make the payment.
In the Bitcoin sphere a payer uses a password to initiate a payment from her computer.
”Security for electronic payments has several parts: first to make sure that only the rightful owner can make a payment, secondly to make sure that the intended recipient actually receives the moneys paid and finally that only money can be paid that is actually owned by the payer and hence can not be spend twice.
 “Bitcoin is secure and cannot be hacked.
Conclusion: Bitcoin is not an electronic form of cash and does not protect privacy.
 by law enforcement, are therefore _potentially_ possible.
 Identification to the humans involved in a payment, e.
 Hence, payments in bitcoins can be traced as the value flows between these exchanges.
But as most Bitcoin transactions effectively constitute a payment in traditional currency at one end or the other, or both, they involve well known parties that exchange bitcoins for and against these currencies, the Bitcoin exchanges.
 The parties in a transaction are identified by unique numbers, and a payment transaction is linked through this number to the transaction wherein the spend value was received.
 This is an essential Bitcoin design property to, at least in theory, allow any party to participate as processing node (miner) in order to get involved in updating the distributed database.
”The central database with transactions in bitcoins is publicly accessible.
 “Bitcoin is anonymous.
Conclusion: Where in practice the ‘systemic trust’ in Bitcoin is no different from that of traditional currencies, Bitcoin operates _de facto_ as a fiat currency.
 This ‘systemic trust’ in traditional, fiat, currency is underpinned by a mix of technical features such as hard to copy bank notes, fraud detection software in financial institutions and government imposed and enforced regulations.
 The users trust, based on  experience and social convention, the correct operation of the system such that received funds are available for further spending.
This looks distinctly similar to the way traditional instruments of payments, such as coins, banknotes and bank transfers, operate.
 The payee therefore trusts the _eventual_ availability of received funds.
 Apparently, the parties involved in payments in bitcoins _believe_ in their eventual recording.
 That is, without formal confirmation of its validity.
”In practice, acceptance of Bitcoin payments takes place before the (irrevocable) recording of the transaction in the distributed database.
 “Bitcoin is not a fiat currency.
Conclusion: Bitcoin does not actually operate as an alternative currency.
 In this case bitcoin can be considered an alternative to other currencies, comparable to an speculative investment in dollars or in commodities, like iron ore, gold or grain.
 A Bitcoin transaction can also be speculative in purpose,  to hoard bitcoins  expecting a raise in their value.
 Cash-in cash-out has been shown the most common mode of operation in bitcoins.
 In this cash-in Cash-out scheme Bitcoin operates then as a facilitator in the circulation of existing currencies and not as a replacement of these.
 In such cases, bitcoins are purchased, swiftly change hands, and are just as fast converted again in another currency.
 In practices Bitcoin transactions are often intended to avoid high transfer fees or bypass local restrictions in making international payments.
 Only miners can create bitcoins, non-miners need to acquire them, usually by way of purchase.
 Real world observation however, shows that most transactions in bitcoins translate, either at the point of purchase, or at the point of sale, in transactions in existing currencies.
By design, Bitcoin is  an alternative currency.
 Complementary currencies  intend to _partially_ displace and replace existing currencies, usually in a local setting.
”An alternative currency, by definition, is designed to _entirely_ displace and replace existing currencies.
 “Bitcoin is an alternative currency.
Conclusion: De-facto, Bitcoin users need to engage services of intermediaries and do pay fees for their transactions.
 After exhausting the lode miners can only earn money by explicitly charging a fee.
 By design, the available amount of bitcoins that can be mined is restricted, and it is expected to be exhausted somewhere around 2040.
 For the time being, a miner is rewarded with newly created bitcoins—that is why updating the database is called ‘mining’.
 A miner also needs to charge for its labor and expenses.
There is an other intermediary in Bitcoin, the operators of the distributed data base, the Bitcoin miners.
a miner), having aggregated some bitcoins by mining and exclusively pays other users that have decided to keep bitcoins.
 The sole exception is if the user is a data base operator (a.
”To make a payment using bitcoins a Bitcoin user needs a “Bitcoin exchange” and these exchanges charge a fee.
 “Bitcoin does away with intermediaries and fees.
Conclusion: Bitcoin is not a peer-to-peer system, but an on-line merchant-customer transaction market place.
 Investments and operating costs of the necessary equipment  rise in tandem with the continuously increasing difficulty of adding a new record to the database that is built into the bitcoin protocol.
Over the time Bitcoin has been operational the inherent hierarchical relation  between miners and users has become more pronounced by an ever rising technical and financial barrier to becoming a miner.
 In this way, the incentive for miners to support each other is limited, and one cannot speak of a peer-to-peer relationship in the traditional sense.
  Also, any time an update to the database is made,  only a single miner is actually adding the transaction records with bitcoin value transfers to the ledger, and gets the financial rewards for doing this.
 However, they are also, and mostly, in competition which each other because they need revenue to pay for the equipment they operate.
 Only miners are, and then only operationally speaking, peers, since they all perform the same software program.
 owner of bitcoins, is hence one between merchants and customer and not one of equals.
” The relationship between these operators and an individual user, i.
”In order to transfer value from one Bitcoin account to another, the owner of bitcoins uses the services of a collective of operators known as ‘miners’ who validate the transaction on the Bitcoin distributed database also known as “the ledger.
 “Bitcoin is a peer-to-peer system.
” Johan Sjerpstra1.
By Eduard de Jong, Geert Lovink and Patrice Riemens“Pigs will fly, but not in the next 100 million years.
 However, mobile money is not a substitute for the financial system and Taylor further stated that any assessment of the social benefits of mobile money first needs to examine the incentives that different stakeholders have to use mobile money, as well as how it fits into a macroeconomic picture.
Concluding her talk, Taylor asked how could we think of mobile money as providing a social good? For example, mobile money provides alternatives so that people need not travel long distances to make transfers or keep money on themselves to make it safe.
 The role thus switches, and mobile money becomes an “extension of corporate and social responsibilities”.
 Here, the boundary between social and profit becomes blurred, as people in Jamaica for example, where Digicel offers products to people with little spending power, see Digicel not as a company that is out to take their money, but one that provides more social benefits than the NGOs and the government do.
 In terms of the commercial side, Digicel were large proponents of mobile money in Haiti and wanted to make a profit from the technology.
 For example, it acts as a platform to pay salaries and offer credit.
 For USAID, mobile money is used for a variety of different things.
Both commercial and non-commercial stakeholders finance the supply-side of mobile money.
 However, mobile money is not a substitute for the financial system and Taylor further stated that any assessment of the social benefits of mobile money first needs to examine the incentives that different stakeholders have to use mobile money, as well as how it fits into a macroeconomic picture.
 Concluding her talk, Taylor asked  how can we think as mobile money as providing a social good? Well, mobile money provides alternatives to the need of travelling and the safe keeping of money.
 The role switches, and mobile money becomes an “extension of corporate and social responsibilities”.
 Here, the boundary between social and profit becomes blurred, as people in Jamaica for example, where Digicel offers products to people with little spending power, see Digicel as a company that is not out to take their money, but one that provides more social benefits then NGOs and the government.
 In terms of the commercial side, Digicel were large proponents of mobile money in Haiti and wanted to make a profit from the technology.
 For USAID, mobile money is used for a variety of different things and acts as a platform to pay salaries and offer credit for instance.
The supply side of mobile money was financed by commercial and non-commercial stakeholders.
 This user group initially made up the core demand for mobile money.
 The people using and demanding it were organizations such as MercyCorps, WorldVision, and PathFinder, who all used mobile money to pay salaries to health workers, amongst other things.
Yet who are its typical users? In the case of the Kenyan M-PESA, is it the elderly women or the young, the rural or the more urban areas? How are they using it, and what can we learn from how they are using it? In the early days of mobile money however, the typical user in Haiti was in fact an NGO.
 However, it differs from alternative currencies and non-monetary systems as it is not rebellious in nature, and in fact integrates people into the current financial system, instead of excluding them.
 Mobile money is an alternative way to transact money and provides new options to people who previously had to depend on traditional financial services or expensive remittance agents.
 The most prominent of those was mobile money, developed as a way to send money soon after the earthquake, as traditional banking infrastructure had proved unreliable.
 However, after the earthquake struck, there was a massive drive to develop technology.
 In the aftermath of a major earthquake, as a country that has witnessed multiple political crises, Haiti is not the kind of place you think about when discussing cutting edge technology.
 Taylor, also began her talk with the following two questions: ”Is mobile money a social good?” and “What kinds of alternatives might mobile money provide?” In order to answer these questions, she touched upon the mobile phone research that has been conducted in the Haiti crisis since 2010.
The session’s first speaker, Erin B.
 What this meant in the lives of the poor and how it helped shape an entire research agenda into mobile devices and airtime system are some of the questions he initially posed.
 He argued that the mobile industry later took note of this and industry professionals soon travelled to Kenya and Uganda to investigate the on-the-ground reality.
 He introduced the topic as growing out of a grassroots movement in sub-Saharan Africa, when people who were using pre-paid mobile phones realized they could send airtime to each other via phones as an alternative currency, and as a mechanism of settling debts, amongst other things.
Bill Maurer moderated the fourth session of MoneyLab on mobile money.
 The scope of the MoneyLab toolkit goes beyond visualization and insights as it is a proposal for a long-term, close collaboration between academics, designers, artists and entrepreneurs, as well as crowdfunding platforms founders and policy-makers to further inquire into the sustainability of crowdfunding as a revenue model.
 Users can then filter and sort according to certain statistics made publicly available (such as average number of funders / success ratio on the platform / average donation, etc) and thus visualize the platforms that best suit their project’s needs.
 It allows users to select relevant criteria, such as their project category (visual arts, performing arts, music, tech, etc), the model they desire to use (donation, investment), and their budget size.
This latter component – a data visualization – allows the users to browse through 60 crowdfunding platforms (as it is aimed at Dutch creatives, the majority of them are in Dutch, however some are international).
As Enache described, the toolkit allows the user to 1) discover what the crowdfunding process involves by reading a series of interviews with artists and entrepreneurs who already crowdfunded and who now share their experiences, 2) view the results of a survey that the two of them ran on artists and entrepreneurs who have crowdfunded and 3) play with a visual dataset of crowdfunding platforms.
 As crowdfunding is becoming mainstream (for instance, in 2013 there were around 300 existing platforms), and as budgets for funding are increasing, it is essential that users can access a structural help program to assist them with the crowdfunding process, stated Enache.
 The toolkit consists of a web based platform and an interactive data visualization that is aimed at assisting people working in creative industries, specifically ”artists, cultural practitioners, designers, programmers, freelancers in the creative space, and entrepreneurs”, in identifying the most suitable online crowdfunding platforms according to their project’s needs.
 Together, they highlighted their existing research on crowdfunding for creative industries in The Netherlands, before presenting the MoneyLab toolkit.
 Enache is an alternative revenue models researcher for the Institute of Network Cultures, specifically for the Moneylab project, and Van Boeschoten is a lecturer at Universiteit voor Humanistiek, with an academic background in crowdfunding.
Irina Enache and Robert van Boeschoten introduced MoneyLab’s interactive Crowdfunding Visual Toolkit to the audience during the seventh session on the final day of the conference.
 Mine read “I’ve been all over the place,” with the response, “and now I’m here.
 The workshop ended in the redistribution of the papers, where individuals read aloud and discussed the messages.
 Our response to the message was the recasting.

The messages we heard from our money was the super ego and the information cast by society around money.
 Considering currency as a medium for storytelling may aid humans in discovering how to cooperate better.
 Today, society declares that many people can not have access to clean water, proper healthcare, or enough food and shelter simply because they do not have enough of a fetishized object.
 If a society wants to decrease the fundamental violence associated with money, a useful tool may be to alter the perception of money as something that will one day turn into something more than we can imagine.
 By extracting resources and demanding labor, colonialists negligently ignored the abilities of a commodity to negotiate social compositions.
 European colonists misinterpreted the wampum as a method of currency and could not comprehend its use for specific, exceptional commodities.
 The shells could be used as peace treaties between tribes or families, funeral sacrifices, the transference of power, or painted red and used as a declaration of war.
 Native American tribes harvested these shells and made wampum beads, which would be strung on deer hide to give weight and materiality to treaties.
 On the eastern coast of Canada, the whelk shell is available for a short period during Winter.

To analyze a currency based on collaboration, Haiven discusses a parable of proto-capitalism and the use of monetary objects 400 years ago.
 A de-fetishized form of money would allow society to negotiate and manage networks based on cooperation.
 Society views money as a powerful entity, but commodity fetishism in capitalism suggests that the set of social relations around money is what actually bestows power.

As the audience converses with our currency, Haiven delves into the perceptions of money.
 The notes are collected and redistributed and we are then asked to write a response to money.
 As if the money were a seashell containing all the noise of the ocean, we are to listen and record the message on a piece of paper.
 A coin or paper money will do fine, and we are to hold the money to our ear and listen to what the money has to say.

In the experiment, Haiven asks everyone to retrieve, from their pockets or wallets, some money.
 Observing a fuller range of emotions around money may guide us to patiently sit with the imperfections of the economy.
 “Avenging money” thus becomes not about storming the palace, but addressing the emotional economic landscape of money head on.
 Haiven asks the audience to join him in the thought experiment that maybe money is not fixable, and instead we can dwell with money’s imperfections by noticing that money is as flawed as the people who make it.
 Buying into this condensed concept results in an ignorance of the human fundament that makes all systems operate.

Haiven begins by discussing the current attitudes around money and the tendency of the economic, technologic, and artistic fields to gravitate towards technocratic explanations of money, as if it were a succinct code.
 This workshop analyses the perception of currency and how through looking at the emotional value of money we can develop tools to reconstruct financial and social models.
 His research focuses on economic and political studies applied to society and culture.
by Delaney ClarkThe “Avenging Money” workshop on Thursday afternoon was guided by Max Haiven, a writer and Assistant Professor in the Division of Art History and Critical Studies at the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, Canada.
 Further reading relevant to platform cooperativism .
 This ideology expands technology and market driven economy and is a social and political stance to create a movement for the commons in the 21st century.
 Scholz admits that these visions are ambitious; it is for an economy that would benefit all.
Workers need to establish their own de-centralized rating systems and Scholz suggests that blockchain and p2p crypto methods may be useful in creating token-based workers rights.
 How can we begin to convey ethical concerns through user design? He thinks we should begin these efforts in places where Uber is illegal, contested or unpopular – for example Rio de Janeiro which recently banned Uber.
 Why can’t these applications integrate with tax regulations to promote wider social initiatives rather than divert profit to off shore tax havens? Scholz calls for further speculative scenarios to begin imagining how platform cooperativism can be a reality.
 This would allow for the profit that is made of from these services to back into the local economy and the public space.
 Types of platform co-ops listed by Scholz include areCo-operative market places  Producer-owned platform cooperatives  City owned platforms 
These are speculative platforms where cities would build a platform similar to Airbnb but the profits go back towards the local government.
 Unions and co-ops can own the Internet services that they use collectively, to enable workers to directly economically benefit from their labor.
 Scholz provides some concrete examples of share economy business models that transform the digital worker model into collective ownership of the platform.
 The sharing economy is the pinnacle of an exhaustive unregulated capitalism that is unethical, unsustainable and in need of change.
 So frequently do digital services avoid responsibility for violent and damaging social affects caused by their applications and services (see numerous cases of Airbnb related robbery or sexual assault in Uber cabs) because automated management avoids accountability.
 Should we really be calling these initiatives as innovative when they are grinding down workforces to generate profits a handful of Silicon Valley start up companies?  “Think about innovation in regards to its effect on the commonwealth and ask
how can we call the sharing economy innovative if it prolongs structural inequality, classism & racism?” ‘Shared economy’ businesses often use bullish tactics to maintain power in countries by prolonging legal procedures and avoiding social responsibility.
 Examining the value system of Silicon Valley start up culture can help develop viable alternatives.
 It is important to ask what does this on-demand economy stand for? Terms like innovation that are so frequently used to describe such ventures that overlook the exploitative, oppressive and unethical side effects of networked capitalism.
1/3 American workers are now an independent worker or freelancer earning their income(s) through digital tools and with little or no workers rights.
 It is urgent to acknowledge the consequences of late cyber capitalism because as Scholz highlights digital labor is not a flash in the pan.
 Like the domestic workers of the last century who were tucked away in people’s houses, the digital workers are hidden in-between the algorithms.
 And these services are built on low paid workers, Amazon’s Mechanical Turk for example pays its workers $2 per hour.
 The growth of the on demand service economy will eventually run your car, your labor,  your emotions and most importantly, your time.
 Businesses such as Uber and Airbnb exploit the network and mobility of the Internet to maximize profit for centralized American businesses from global networked, low paid digital workers.
 Scholz sets out to define platform cooperativism in relation to the sharing economy that is so disastrous it deserves a new title; Scholz describes it as the ‘on demand service economy’.

The opening keynote was delivered by Trebor Scholz (video here), one of the organisers who provided some useful resources and terminology for reconfiguring the political and social implications of web 2.
 The conference hosted a range of speakers from Micheal Bauwens, Yochai Benker and two that will be at Moneylab next weekend, Rachel O’ Dwyer and Dmyriti Kleiner.
Last week the New School in New York hosted a two-day symposium that set out to explore how the internet can be changed to create new democratic structures and social commons.
 While the vision of a cashless world is one many in the field push toward, the power that infrastructure, both technological and social have will always complicate the discussion.
 In the end, the materiality of mobile money must be understood.
 Receipts and debts are useful tools for maintaining and expanding distinctly human trust-based social structures.
 The storage of the money itself is only one part of the equation; Nelms spoke about the importance of account keeping.
 While new technologies can aid in this, there are also downsides, mostly related to the complex infrastructure needed to support electronic storage and processing.
 From the simple piggy bank, to complex chip and pin systems, money has value that must be stored.
 Beyond these distribution networks, Nelms also discussed the importance of ‘money repertoires,’ and how mobile technology complicates these as well.
 Card networks, wire systems, satellite communications are all parts of the distribution systems that fuel the capabilities of mobile money.
Nelms also discussed how mobile money is also an infrastructure itself.
 Interestingly, mobile money is rarely replacing these alternatives, but rather complements them.
 Other intermediaries include piggy banks, human agents, postal offices, kiosks where gambling and gaming are carried out, and other such channels that were designed to serve different purposes but were soon re-appropriated to also serve a financial role.
 Nevertheless, mobile money is often only one of many other channels that people use.
On the ‘2’ side of the discussion, Nelms spoke about how mobile money allows for easier saving and transferring of money.
 This can be useful to both hide money (or the lack thereof), in order to preserve status, make deals more discretely, or maintain wealth within female lines.
 Mobile money allows women to control and transfer money without male consent or surveillance.
 Hence, patriarchal forms of power and control that exist in traditional payment systems can now be moved to what Nelms terms ‘uterine relations,’ or female based social structures, made possible by a channel such as mobile phones.
 Mothers and grandmothers often rely on it to communicate and transfer money with their siblings or daughters.
 Not only this, but it also engages more female participants, since the transfer of money is household related.
 Mobile money primarily connects families, friends and relatives.
Peers, as Nelms describes, are usually members of the same family, for example in Haiti and Africa.
Nelms began by complicating the traditional definitions of p2p money transfers, expanding on who the ‘peers’ actually are and how to better understand the ‘2’ (who are the intermediaries and what consequences does this have?).
 Nelms’ presentation at MoneyLab focused on mobile money, and particularly p2p transactions.
 His research interest is on monetary ecologies, more specifically on how currencies interact with each other.
The talk by Taylor Nelms focused on lessons learned throughout his work at the Institute for Money, Technology, and Financial Inclusion.
 Video will follow shortly.
”Such a reflection would enable a profound philosophical shift in the way we are accustomed to relate to money and the institutions that manage it.
 He seeks not only to find ways in which we can change and improve the dynamic between the people and the economy, but also to inspire us to reflect on what he calls “the idea of what value is, the idea of giving your freedom away.
 Through his activist work, he seeks to bring attention to the flaws of the current
financial systems we live in both in the United States and inEurope.
 It would work towardsinvesting in the commons, in a way that would demand a necessary rebuilding
of modern capitalism.
 One passionate audience member exclaimed: “But there’s nothing wrong with socialism!”In Costanzo’s view, a new economic system would examine the question of infrastructure and would work towards a system that would set out to benefit the greater population, rather than a number of elite groups.
”This question naturally spurred discussions about socialism and whether a system standing somewhat between the two could exist.
 Costanzo posits the following question during the group discussion: Can the Commons exist within Capitalism?“Paper money is ridiculous on another level.
 Costanzo’s ideal financial shift includes the Commons, and would be a system that would, provide government funding to local organizations, thereby encouraging greater financial investments in public goods.
Costanzo’s Free Money Movement was one of the many artistic economic protests to take place during the Occupy Wall Street movement.
By Anissa Jousset
During his workshop at MoneyLab#2: Economies of Dissent Jim Costanzo, associate professor of Photography and Fine Arts at the Pratt Institute and founding director of the Aaron Burr Society examines the different facets of resistance and financial revolutions through alternative austerity movements.
org/publications
INC Reader #10.
org/moneylabINC Readers: http://networkcultures.
MORE INFORMATIONMoneyLab: http://networkcultures.
, focused on the monetization debate and looked into three specific fields of inquiry: Bitcoins and other crypto-currencies, crowd funding research and mobile money in the global South.
Of central importance to this project is the formation of a collaborative network of researchers, artists, developers, engineers, and others interested in sharing, coining, critiquing, and ushering in alternative network economies.
 It is not enough to merely promote and further develop (technical) alternatives, we also need time to ask ourselves critical questions and re-examine the very underpinnings of our endeavours.
MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives is a network that aims to critically explore, map and probe the politics, inner-workings and governance of these alternative digital-economic forms.
 These coincide with the huge growth of mobile money transfer services across Asia and Africa and the general convergence of digital and financial industries.
 Online bartering sites, a plethora of crowdfunding platforms, new forms of valuation, e-wallets and crypto-currencies like Bitcoin, are but a few examples.
EMAIL TO
Miriam Rasch (Publications Coordinator @ Institute of Network Cultures) at miriam[at]networkcultures[dot]orgBACKGROUNDWhile the economic downturn endures and budget cuts prevail, we have witnessed the emergence and rise of alternative payment systems and revenue models in digital media.
DEADLINE FOR CONTRIBUTIONS
September 1st, 2014.
 You may expect a response before July 1st, 2014.
) before June 1st, 2014.
org/publicationsWANT TO JOIN?Send in your proposal (500 words max.
For scope and style, take a look at the previous INC Readers and the style guide (pdf): http://networkcultures.
FORMATSWe welcome interviews, dialogues, essays and articles, images (b/w), email exchanges, manifestos, or other, with a maximum of 8,000 words, but preferably shorter at around 5,000 words.
POSSIBLE TOPICSMobile Money // Networks & Money // Activism & Finance // Monetization of Social Capital // Crowdfunding Research // Crypto Money // Histories of Internet Banking // Money & Art // Recommendation Systems //       E-wallets // Payment Systems // Like, +One, and Favorite Economies.
WE INVITEInternet, visual culture and media scholars, critical finance scholars, anthropologists, Bitcoin researchers, artists, curators, free software and open-content advocates, P2P gurus, financial activists, conference participants and others to submit proposals for The MoneyLab Reader.
 A volume of critical essays by theorists, programmers, activists, and artists; edited by Geert Lovink and Nathaniel Tkacz and to be published early 2015.
MONEYLAB READERPart of the project will be the publication of the MoneyLab Reader in the INC Reader series.
 Blog reports and videos of the talks and discussions can be found on this website.
 The first MoneyLab conference took place in Amsterdam on March 21-22 2014.
Call for Contributions: The MoneyLab Reader
INC Reader #10Edited by Geert Lovink and Nathaniel TkaczMONEYLABThe MoneyLab project – launched late 2013 by the Institute of Network Cultures and the University of Warwick – considers sprouting alternative digital-economic forms, radical experiments with crypto-currencies, payment systems and revenue models against the backdrop of the ongoing global economic decline.
In the end, Scott explained that it is this hybridization of knowledge between opposing or dissimilar communities or ideas that lead to the most creative and positive changes.
 Finally, Scott mentioned his project ‘The London School of Financial Activism’ that aims to gather people interested in understanding how financial tools and concepts work, by experimenting with them.
 Another idea is to look at organizations engaged with alternative finance, whose aim is to make people behave more like producers of financial goods rather than mere users.
 Instead, going to events, meeting these actors and striking a conversation can be more playful and fruitful.
 This, suggested Scott, does not help create a conversation.
” From his experience with activist groups, Scott noticed how they tend to set a clear boundary – us and them – when relating to financial actors.
 One of his final slides summed up how he views the hacker ethos, and how it can be applied to the financial system: by “challenging power and maintaining openness through playful subversion and rebellious creativity.
” He used this as an example of how people often have trouble reconciling that members of traditionally opposing groups could in fact be a member of both.
Turning to more personal experiences, Scott described attending a G20 protest after leaving work (at the time, he was working as a broker), only to be commended by the crowd for “coming disguised as a banker.
” All of these forms of hacking involve the blurring and challenging of boundaries and norms, a theme he went on to discuss in more depth, touching on the ‘copyleft’ movement, John Cage’s silent compositions, and other forms of deconstructing perceived binaries.
” Scott compared this form of subversive ethos to examples such as urban exploring, radical approaches to anthropology, and “kicking the door down to make a table.
Moving more to the topic of hacking, Scott displayed a Steve Levy quote saying “Hackers believe that essential lessons can be learned about the system – about the world – from taking things apart, seeing how they work, and using this knowledge to create new and interesting things.
 Finance uses similar familiar interfaces that in fact obscure people’s understanding of it.
 What the user knows little or nothing about is how the electronic device actually works, how it is wired, let alone the protocols and means of control embedded in the Internet.
 The latter refers to the screen of any electronic device (from smart phones to tablets and PCs) that acts as a window for the user to connect to the virtual world.
 In an analogy, Scott compared finance to a black box or a ‘windows interface’.
 Scott showed several such illustrations of the common imaginaries that people have: black suit bankers, automated trading machines, a world economy in the hand of others.
One reason of passivity is the perceived complexity; the other is that people believe finance is ruled by an expert elite.
 Scott aims to address the reasons why people often feel passive and distanced from finance, and how they could learn from hacking ethics in order to take a more active role.
 Yet, this way they alienate the average citizens from participating in the finance sector.
 This is a picture often promoted by the financial actors themselves in order for them to affirm their own status and knowledge.
 Finance is a world of the elite.
 People imagine finance as a complex industry that only financial experts and bankers can understand.
 Scott claims that the way people imagine the financial sector to function can only perpetuate the inherent power differential that already exists.
 He began by speaking about different power relations in finance.
In his talk, Brett Scott discussed how hacker ethics could be applied to the financial system.
 Installing black box systems that privately regulate creative licenses hinders the performing arts as it becomes tethered to the old chains of copyright and enforced with networked technology of the 21st century.
 Automated music recognition enables musicians to be better informed on their music rights but creates a system of surveillance for performance and public venues.
 Although it is only the sound that is being recorded it is enough to make any performance event liable to claims of copyright infringement.
 This has wider repercussions on the freedom of public venues and the autonomy of the performing artist whose performances must now abide copyright legislation.
 With the advent of automated copyright surveillance of performance music, venues are forced to change there booking contracts to incorporate the recording of all live performances.
 It would appear that the only way to enforce and perpetuate copyright policy of the 20th century is to create music data surveillance systems to automatically monitor, store and administrate creative licenses.
 The live concert, once an ephemeral once-only experience is now systematically monitored and monetized for the interests of copyright law.
 And like every other form of surveillance people act differently when they think they are being watched.
 Applying music recognition in bars in this way creates surveillance software for the copyright industry.
 Live performances are now being systematically recorded by black boxes that are often hidden or obscured to prevent musicians refusing to have their performances recorded and tampering with the device.
 Since 2005 companies such as DJ monitor have been installing music recognition software in festivals, clubs and next year Ministry of Sound in London will join the party.
 
 
However the way in which this service is being implemented is far from transparent.
 Musicians can now see how the rights are being managed, what they are owed and get all the information on playback and payouts in real-time.
 Publishing firms such as Kobalt are now able to share the data collected from performance rights with their clients, creating a much more transparent system for administrating copyright.
’ Bindu De KnockAccording to the music & IP lawyer Bindu De Knock from Bergh Stoop Sanders Attorneys music recognition software is not changing the fundamental laws of performers rights but it is enabling more efficient and transparent ways of enforcing those laws.
 Technology is but a means in the music industry.
 ‘Artists/composers’ attitude towards technology is twofold: some hate it others embrace it.
”  As Jackson mentions, if the technology enables a better circulation of performance royalties to the original creators than the economic value of the technology is worthwhile.
 If this technology means that collection agencies like PPL (public performance license) no longer need to work on mere estimation in order to fairly distribute the license fees they receive from venues/shops/bars, then that helps us.
 We’re all selling something, but since these days music is so easily and unashamedly stolen, it’s difficult to make a living.
 “I want to get paid for what I create just the same as people who work in factories and laboratories and bakeries.
 UK songwriter Juliette Jackson of The Big Moon mostly agrees that the music recognition technology is in place to serve the interests of the artists.
 Although many musicians I have spoken with are unaware of the technical processes involved, they all seem pleased that claiming royalties on their music has become easier and there is more money going into their pocket.
 The software used for mobile applications like Shazam is also being used in public venues and online streaming websites to automate the administration involved with issuing publishing rights.
  However, recent advancements in music recognition software potentially transforms how copyright can be enforced for performance rights and royalties.
 It is commonly argued that this complexity does not benefit musicians and prevents them from making informed claims of their rights and royalties.
 Traditionally royalty statements have been very difficult to retrieve and keep track of as it involves lots of paperwork and different laws apply in different countries.
 Every recorded song that is broadcast or performed in public is subject to performance royalties, which on average can account for 1/3 of a musician’s basic income.
 Launched in 2014, the campaign brings together tech companies and music publishers to create better revenue models for musicians.
 ‘Get played, Get paid’ is the slogan of a campaign that gathered at Amsterdam Dance Event last month and aims to change the revenue model for musician’s royalties and performing rights organisations.
Visit artist’s website:  femkeherregraven.
 Imagination is all it takes.
After all, it is up to us to decide what to do with this knowledge, and how far do we want to go chasing the shadow.
 Opening up the black box of information, she passes the rights to debate and discuss the financial markets to a wider audience.
 Rather then offering a solution, she forces transparency over the financial structures, allowing users to play by the rules of real geopolitical chess.
I believe Femke Herregraven is trying to tell us is that we should not fear the complexity of the software running behind the surface.
 Today economies are being shaped by landscapes just as much as landscapes are being carved by economies.
 In Herregraven’s Volatility Storms, she illustrates how catastrophe bonds can turn hurricanes, earthquakes, tsunami or ice melting into financial products, allowing investors to bet and monetize on global warming.
The irony is that even the stakes of far-fetched financial investments are often based on materiality.
 Demystification of finance begins when the seemingly abstract matter meets spaghetti of submarine cables.
 In the end, the alchemy of tax evasion, data transfers or high-frequency trading is deeply dependent on its material backbone.
 Within The All Infrared Line project she investigates historical and current manifestations of communication networks that support the international markets.
 Physical elements that stitch the global infrastructure together.
 But instead of looking for gold, she found herself subscribed to an eternal search for the most boring things imaginable.
Dedicated to track the hidden, Herregraven’s work resembles a treasure hunt.
 According to the author, it can be a tool to navigate, deconstruct and
reflect on economical structures, linking immaterial flows back to geographies, jurisdictions, nationhood and material object.
 Taxodus is designed to become a public interface to knowledge, which is today exclusive to the fiscal lawyers and accountancy firms.
The game is based on real data on international capital flows, such as national tax treaties.
 In the end players receive their scores in a form of a fiscal report.
 By setting up intermediate holdings globally, players explore potential routes through which multinationals in reality can “neutralize” their tax burdens.
Aiming to reveal invisible pathways, Herregraven designed Taxodus, “a serious web-based game”, which invites users to play on behalf on the multinationals and to dodge paying as much tax as they can.
 Meanwhile, the principles of the rising offshore economy remain hidden and inaccessible for public.
 Countries begin to brand themselves with taxes.
 Other nation states are forced to lower their corporate taxes more and more in competition for the investment.
 Wealthy OECD countries offer multinationals opportunities to evade financial regulation legally, allowing large sums of capital to accumulate in their jurisdictions.
Offshore financial centers are less and less associated with tropical islands and Mafiosi: today they stand at the very core of mainstream global economy.
 Value transformed into a network of offshore tax havens and hedge funds.
 Wealth that once had a material condition and was contextualized by its territory is now disconnected from a specific place, labor or material production.
 Capital flows are merely perceived as abstractions and read in forms of signs, metaphors and linguistic exchanges.
 Money can be created purely out of the circulation of money, magically materializing from itself.
” Today, finance resembles alchemy.
In her talk, she quotes German philosopher Georg Simmel: “Money, more than any other form of value, makes possible the secrecy, invisibility and silence of exchange.
 Herregraven is a designer and researcher, whose mission can be described as melting finance back again into material condition and exposing the obscure processes running on the background of our societies.
This is the opening statement of Femke Herregraven’s talk for TEDxValuz, called Geographies of Avoidance.
 Speculating on the idea of economy as immaterial, abstract matter, financial experts insinuate that global economical processes are too complex to be tackled by non-expert audience, and therefore should only be a concern of ‘professionals’.
The implication of liquid, ungraspable condition of finance is already contained within language metaphors, widely used to describe financial markets.
 Dark pools.
 Frozen markets.
 Evaporation.
Flows of capital.
 By Rachel O’Dwyer .
 And rather than despairing, I think it drives home the importance of critical projects like Moneylab.
 With companies like PayPal, VeriFone, Google, Visa and Apple at the helm, this is what the future of money may well look like.
 It was also something of a wake-up call to attend a trade show on money as opposed to an academic conference, workshop or festival about the positive socioeconomic potential of Timebanks and cryptocurrencies.
Moneylab 2020 was a fascinating insight into the vanguard of payments and financial innovation.
 In general when privacy did come up it was framed as a slightly quaint notion, something that people born before the new millennium were a bit worried about.
com, were using host card emulation to develop tools for consumers to “keep [their] personal details personal”.
 Only one company, Privacy.
 Instead, ‘privacy concerns’ centred on securing sensitive and valuable data from theft or corruption as it moved between different payments systems, with a lot of talk devoted to the introduction of biometrics for mobile, new kinds of identification and authentication for users and global standards for the tokenisation of data.
 Instead Money2020 was the kind of corporate environment where a panellist from the Fast Identity Online Alliance (FIDO) could cheerfully extol the potential applications of their new biometric identification system for citizen authentication without any of the thousands-strong audience seeming to bat an eyelid.
 No thing to hide?Alongside the plentiful talk of securing mobile payments and being sure about data at Money2020, there was a notable absence of talk about the privacy implications of these new payments networks.
 During Money 2020, for example, NASDAQ exchange announced a partnership with Chain to use a blockchain-based system for automatic credit clearing and trades between banks and other private companies.
 Another significant proposition had to do with automatic credit clearing between banks using private blockchains.
 Others suggested that the Blockchain would be used to authenticate and track the provenance of vast swathes of data produced by the Internet of Things.
 The approach is similar to the Mycelia platform described here.
 Mostly Colu is using the ledger to trace the provenance and authenticity of objects, digital files and data.
 The company’s presentation featured a demo from thirteen-year-old developer Jonathan Ohayon, who had devised a smart lock to keep his five year old brother away from his favourite computer game.
 Colu, present at Money2020, describes itself as the “new value layer on top of the Internet”, allowing users to transfer any asset onto the blockchain.
 Unsurprisingly one of the more successful articulations of the blockchain has been Everledger, a company that records the characteristics and provenance of diamonds.
 Far from the aspirations of more egalitarian approaches to property and governance, this was about using a distributed ledger for the digitisation of physical assets or for new kinds of digital rights management.
At Money2020 the cryptocurrency focus was less on imaginaries of ‘blockchain quantum teleportation’ as David Birch put it and more on using private blockchains for greater asset liquidity.
 Of course, it’s difficult to tip in Bitcoin.
 Today, they’re very much part of the status quo, developing partnerships with banks and multinationals by day and appreciating the kitschy delights of strip clubs on the Vegas strip at night.
 
 Being sure about thingsWhat about alternative currencies in the future of money and payments innovation? Bill Maurer told me that just a few years ago, the Bitcoiners were on the borders of the Money 2020 conference, slinking around the exhibition hall like sulky emo teenagers and grafittying the PayPal stands with not-so cryptic missives like ‘Bitcoin is here’.
 And yet, the implications of this is that our payments devices are producing not only new kinds of access for the unbanked, or new kinds of ease and flexibility for those with ready alternatives, but also producing new kinds of identity-based monetary systems, and with them, new credit castes and financial instabilities.
 While things like social media and network affinity data were mentioned alongside obvious elements such as timely money transfers and bill pay, the general consensus was that more traditional scoring methods such as FICO were not out of the picture just yet.
 Others claimed that the machinations of their “robot in the sky” weren’t directly intelligible to their human underlings.
 So what kind of data is most important for determining future credit worthiness? Most companies were reluctant to say, unsurprisingly, although a Kabbage rep claimed that there were 5000+ different data points informing lending conditions and credit scoring on their platform.
 Kabbage, which specializes in small business loans and Vouch Finance, which specifically determines credit worthiness based on an applicant’s social network, were just a few more similar companies with wares at Money 2020.
 Branch leverages social and transactional data based on the use of services such as M-Pesa and Facebook to produce credit ratings and to offer tailored micro-loans to its clients.
 One company, Branch (formerly Kiva) focuses on data emerging from the growing use of smart phones in Sub-Saharan Africa.
As mobile payments become more significant in both the Global South and the Global North, companies were coming forward who specialize in financial services and credit offerings based around mobile phone data and machine learning.
 The end result was a lot of touching speeches by Fintech CEOs about the poor and their urgent need for push notifications and financial assets.
 Where data monetisation is already an established value proposition in developed markets, a trend at Money 2020 concerned the use of smart phone data from the adoption of Android, Huawei and Samsung phones in emerging markets to precision new kinds of financial services to the worlds un- or under-banked.
 Incidentally, a cursory analysis of Money2020 registration and twitter data by Chase Pay indicated that attendees were overwhelmingly male, affluent, and concerned with oral hygiene products.
 What your things are saying about youIn a similar vein, a focus across panels on ecommerce, mobile wallets and consumer behaviour was on analysing the data generated by new points of transaction in order to provision tailored consumer and financial services.
 Alongside a wholesale push to “close the loop” for offline payments, the shift from cash to digital payments is also a shift away from publicly mandated money to all kinds of different private money infrastructures, as networks and private corporations issue their very own currencies and guaranteeing their worth.
The focus here seemed to be on incentivising consumer adoption of mobile payments and developing value propositions that move people away from data-poor cash – encouraging a more wholesale surrender of consumer data and identity in return for new kinds of remuneration- call them rewards, loyalty points or gift tokens – that could be used to pay for goods and services.
 Intermediaries such as Points and Manifold Technology are developing “loyalty currency” platforms allowing for fungibility between different rewards schemes, so that your Starbucks points might soon be good for your next car wash.
 Large multinationals and payments companies like CurrentC are now issuing loyalty cards that accrue points from a variety of stores like CVS-Pharmacy and Wal-Mart, while Blackhawk Network and Stockpile have developed gift cards for purchasing stock options.
 Rewards and loyalty points were an undeniable focus of many of the panels.
 But the real focus, as Lana was keen to point out at Money 2020, seemed to be on the use of loyalty and identity as de facto currencies.
 This included examples like airmiles, which can be collected and spent online, as well as mobile airtime, where pay-as-you-go phone credit is used as a form of domestic and international remittance.
 
Money-Like Things‘Money-like things’, an expression I’m constantly stealing from this article by Lana Swartz, was another focus of Money 2020, with platforms developing monetary tokens, vouchers, loyalty cards and credits that work just like money but are privately issued by multinationals and platforms rather than by the State.
 A combination of mobile phones, Wi-Fi beacons, RFID and NFC enabled devices would also create brand new opportunities for monitoring and influencing customer behaviours, so in-store greetings like “welcome back John Anderton, how did those Gap button downs work out for you?” might not be a plot from Science Fiction, but coming soon to a store near you.
 Do we really want our monetary transactions delegated to our kitchen appliances or disappearing into the environment?Another aspect of ambient commerce looked to bring the data tracking and monetisation capacities of online and mobile environments to bricks and mortar spaces – what one VeriFone representative cheerfully dubbed “cookies for the real world”.
 We’re faced with similar questions around ambient payments.
 Faced with the ethical and political implications of seamless technologies, ubiquitous computing quickly realised that a little bit of transparency can actually be a good thing.
What’s interesting here isn’t only that the hype so closely matches those around early twenty-first century imaginaries of ubiquitous computing, but that this vision of the future of money – with payment embedded in every device and machine-to-machine payments as a matter of course – could drastically change not only what it means to ‘transact’, but ‘who’ or ‘what’ executes a transaction.
 Gas tanks will automatically refill, groceries restock before you have a chance to run out of capers and your pool filter will place an order for chemicals to maintain optimum PH levels (because if you’re at the vanguard of payments privilege it follows that you might also have #outdoorheatedswimmingpoolproblems).
 Others focused on machine-to-machine payments.
 To realise this vision, companies in the Money 2020 expo experimented with mobile wallets and phones as point-of-sale terminals but also RFID enabled wearables: jewellery, tags, labels and key fobs.
 So too, monetary exchange will be ‘frictionless’, ‘seamless’, and ‘invisible’.
 Payments will happen online, offline and everyware in between, with ‘behind the scenes’ and ‘in the background’ both being popular destinations.
 According to many of the speakers, transactivity will soon migrate from the bulky point of sale terminal into the everyday environment.
 A similar horizon was forecast in the future of payments at Money2020.
 ‘Ubicomp’ claimed that computational intelligence would migrate from the desktop and weave seamlessly into the fabric of everyday life – into our alarm clocks and coffee pots, fridges, newspapers and cars.
 The dawn of ‘ubiquitous computing’ was announced by institutions like Xerox Parc and MIT Media Lab at the turn of the millennium and depicted in films such as Minority Report.
 So what does the future of money look like to Money 2020? Things that Transact:

“#Internetofthings is when the toaster mines Bitcoins to pay off its gambling debts to the fridge”(2015, Reddit)A big focus of this year’s Money2020 was on what one Internet of Things panellist referred to as “ambient commerce”.
 The Fintech conference has grown since its inaugural event in 2012 and with now over 10,000 attendees, recently moved to the Venetian hotel in Vegas, a sprawling venue that features miles of casinos, stadium-size conference spaces and an indoor reproduction of a Venice street scene complete with an Italian sky, canals, gondolas and boutiques (but minus the feral cats).
Dan Schulman, PayPal, Money 2020 October 2015 The Internet of Things that Transact: Money 2020, October 23-27, 2015Money 2020 is a conference and tradeshow event held annually in Las Vegas on future innovations in payments.
The revolution in financial services is not about tapping the phone versus swiping the card; it’s much more profound.
Money is the fuel that fires the best aspirations amongst all of us.
Money is the fuel that drives the dreams and ambitions of fathers and mothers.
 Money is incredibly personal.
 Terranova concluded that she currently does not hold an answer to the way in which this can be achieved.
 Terranova added that there should be functions added to the new money and crypto currencies as well, such as the ability to invest in tax return, health, education, research, art and the environmental crisis.
 Mentioning a few functions of money, she pointed out that money is capital, a means to command society, a means to structure and order a given society.
Terranova then talked about the critique of finance that emerged on neoclassical economics, comparing the concept to the Keynesian beauty contest theory (1936).
 Money is now all about future returns rather than comparing commodities and exchanging them.
 The understanding of money has changed – it no longer has a general equivalent but rather becomes individual investment.
On linking money to neoclassical economics, Terranova mentioned the allocation of scarce resources by alternative means, which has to do with the choice of where to invest one’s money and what kind of return one gets.
 Nevertheless, she also posed a question: how could people solve the problem of money design as to allow different communities to contribute? Terranova mentioned that 90% of the money in circulation is scriptural, electronic money, while only 10% is represented by actual bank notes and coins.
Terranova argues that Bitcoin is important for breaking the taboo on money and therefore it should be valued for that and for being an emerging transnational currency.
 As a main research question, Terranova brought up the issue of the economization of network cultures and how it might be the expression of something larger – like the monetization of participation – arguing that data is actually currency.
 Therefore, she started making her argument on the virtualization of money through technology, and questioning the monetization of labour and social media.
Tiziana Terranova began her presentation by mentioning she does not work on money and she has no specific expertise on this, other than working as a new media researcher for a long time.
Tickets are on sale here.
Femke Herregraven delivered a beautiful program booklet for MoneyLab#2: Economies of Dissent, happening next week on Thursday 3 and Friday 4 December at Pakhuis de Zwijger.
 At its core lies the idea that the value of things constantly changes and adapts to different economic entities; nevertheless, the necessary infrastructure in this scenario would still be supported by a state-type of entity.
 Furthermore, the two speakers argue for a different monetary system based on an “algorithmic, data-rich matching algorithm” that functions on the basis of equal and mediated social distribution and which can assign value to items, based on social factors.
In an attempt to critique the system, the Heidenreich brothers analyzed money from two perspectives: first, as a system of power that fosters inequality and exploitation, according to Bichler/Nitzan; second, money as the driving force behind the scarcity of resources, and lack of their proper allocation and distribution, as described in a paper written by J.
 For example, as a loanable funds approach, Bitcoin functions as a model of exchange similar to that of the Bank of England, all within a hierarchical system.
On the subject of alternative monetary forms such as Bitcoin, the Heidenreich brothers claimed that they should not be thought of as an alternative proposal to money as they tend to perform on exactly the same scale as traditional money and follow a “very old-fashioned approach”.
 Another definition by the Bank of England is that “money is a social institution that provides a solution to the problem of trust”.
 They started by defining what we understand as money in the words of the Bank of England – “money in the modern economy is just a special form of IOU (“I owe you”) or – in the language of economic accounts – a financial asset”.
 The pair presented their latest work “Non-money”, that looks at money from the standpoint of finance with the goal to criticize the issue of money since, the two argue, this is technologically obsolete today.
Following Saskia Sassen’s talk were the Heidenreich brothers, authors of the book “Mehr Geld” (or “More Money” in German).
 However, what about money? How can we change the power money has over our lives? How can we design and engineer a different medium of exchange  that embodies different values and alternative ways of thinking and understanding?More on this and the battle soon….
 But what is next? We look increasingly critical at the way we live, work, travel, produce, and consume.
What does money look like in 2030? We realize our current financial system is breaking down.
 In preparation of this battle, we are organising a (invite only) prototype design fiction brainstorm this Monday the 20th at the Dutch Design Week in Eindhoven.
The MoneyLab team and the Design Thinkers Group is organising a design battle in March 2015.
 Sponsored by the University of California Humanities Research Institute and the UCLA Computer Science Department’s Kleinrock Center for Internet Studies, along with the NSF-Funded Participation Lab at the Institute of Society and Genetics, the Department of Information Studies, and the UCLA Law School’s Program on Understanding Law, Science and Evidence.
Panelists: Radhika Desai, Anumpam Chander, Anita Ramasastry
Moderator: Jennifer MnookinOrganized by Morgan Currie, Bradley Fidler, and Christopher Kelty, with a special thanks to Lana Swartz.
 Roundtable – Digital Cash and the State
12:30-2:00This panel will address the legal and political issues surrounding digital currency, including how current banking and financial regulations deal with something digital cash, how different countries around the world are regulating digital currency, and the political economy of payment systems.
Panelists
Julian Dibbell, Alex Golub, Kevin Driscoll
Moderator: Tom BoellstorffBrunch with Books – Readings by Science Fiction Authors
11:30 – 12:306.
 This panel discusses the blurred lines between fictional and actual payment, bringing to light how this exchange also must contend with issues of race, labor, trust and participation.
 Fictional online currency, however, has been around since the early online game experiences found in MOOs and MUDs.
 From gold farming to Linden dollars, fictional representations of money have very real market value today.
 Glowpearls, Ingots and Mana – Currency in Other Worlds
10:00-11:30Fictional currency in fantasy worlds has a remarkable exchange value.
Panelists:
Emin Gun Sirer, Finn Brunton, Amelia Acker
Moderator: Chris KeltySUNDAY, September 28, Decafe, Perloff Hall5.
 This panel will examine early networks and experimental means to economic practices, such as FIDONET, spam, piracy, and payment on mobile phones, as users began mining the loopholes of legal electronic transaction infrastructures as far back as the days of Usenet.
 Instead, network infrastructures that were not designed to be places for economic exchange and payment slowly developed these capabilities, which in many cases came to define them.
 Dangers, Alternatives, and Experiments in Online Currency
3:45 – 5:45Economic exchange in online networks did not emerge in the commercial forms we are accustomed to today.
Panelists
Bill Maurer, Virginia Eubanks, and Lana Swartz
Moderator: Sandra Harding4.
 Given that the future of payment as a public infrastructure is still up for grabs, panelists will consider how we came to the present moment, and how might we change it.
 This panel examines how privatizing currency transfer has been a historical process of enclosure, one that makes certain demographics more vulnerable than others.
 Politics and Power in Payment Systems
2:00 – 3:30Owning the act of payment is a huge industry, as private companies have turned interchange fees of credit cards and mobile money into a business greater in value than the biotech industry, Hollywood, or venture capital.
Panelists:
Karl Schroeder, Sherryl Vint, Matt Novak
Moderator: Rachel Lee3.
 This panel features science fiction authors, futurist commentators, and literary scholars to explore future currencies, debt, and post-capitalist exchange in speculative, imaginative forms.
 In this regard, science fiction utilizes descriptions of currency systems either as symptoms of capitalist decay or illustrations of alternative economic regimes.
 In Star Trek, for example, alien payment systems exist alongside a (human) post-capitalist utopia.
 Futures and Speculative Currencies
11:15-1:00In science fiction, electronic payment systems are often tied to broader social orders.
Panelists:
Ron Rivest, Allan Schiffman, David Stearns
Moderator: Radhika Desai2.
  It asks how we came to understand the possibility of a cashless society, and explores the institutions and technologies, such as early credit card systems and cryptographic techniques, that were marshaled in search of this ideal.
 Legacies of Digital Payment
9:15 – 11:00This panel explores the histories, motivations, and contexts behind early electronic payment technologies.
ScheduleSaturday 9/27 – Decafe, Perloff Hall
8:00 – 9:00 – Coffee and tea
9:00-9:15 – Introduction
9:15 – 11:00 – Legacies of Digital Payment
11:15 – 1:00 – Futures and Speculative Currencies
1:00 – 2:00 – Lunch
2:00- 3:30 – Politics and Power in Payment Systems
3:45 – 5:45 – Dangers, Alternatives, and Experiments in Online CurrencySunday 9/28 – Decafe, Perloff Hall
9:30 – 10:00 – Coffee and tea
10:00 – 11:00 – Glowpearls, Ingots, and Mana – Currency in Other Worlds
11:00 – 12:30 – Brunch with Books
12:30 – 12:45 – Break
12:45 – 2:00 – Digital Cash and the State1.
 Together guests will explore the historical legacy of payment systems – from conventional cash and credit, to prototype experiments with digital currency – alongside the speculative representations and explorations of science fiction in novels, film and games.
 That’s why this conference gathers together humanities scholars, engineers, and science fiction authors, all focused on the past and future of payment.
 Like jet-packs, flying cars and trips to mars, digital cash is a relic of the past and a constantly renewed promise from the future.
But we have heard these stories before.
 It’s said that the old world of brick and mortar banks, paper cash, and plastic cards is disappearing – and the future is bitcoins, P2P infrastructures, and e-cash served through dotcom companies and mobile phone carriers.
Today’s discussions about electronic currency often focus on the obsolescence of traditional institutions such as the federal reserves and credit companies.
And you can buy your ticket here.
You can find the full program here.
If you want to know more, come to MoneyLab#2: Economies of Dissent.
 Venture Communism proposes instruments such as communist bonds and peer-production licenses designed to help ‘scalably’ sustain and nurture communal production under conditions of prevailing neoliberal capitalism.
Venture Communism is a means to construct a new society in the bosom of the old; to extract value from the capitalist exploitation chain and and put this value to use for the benefit of the many.
This Friday afternoon at the MoneyLab#2:Economies of Dissent symposium, Dmytri Kleiner and Baruch Gottlieb present instruments for Venture Communism.
 Meanwhile, crowdfunding will surely have a chapter of its own in the upcoming MoneyLab Reader, which is expected to be published in early 2015.
The organizers of the seminar hope to host yet another in the near future, and I look forward to also seeing a wider audience (also platform owners and prospective campaigners).
 The toolkit was, I believe, well received by the audience and we got useful feedback, including a suggestion to crowdfund the project in order to take it even further than the website.
 By selecting certain filters, the visualization then shows them the most relevant platforms for their project’s characteristics.
 Third, an interactive visualization where users can explore a database of Dutch and international crowdfunding platforms.
 of funders, what help they needed and would they do it again.
 This includes data on time effort involved, what type of funders are predominant (strong, weak?), average donation, average no.
 Second, the results of a survey that was also answered by creators who crowdfunded.
 representing the major project categories on any crowdfunding platform.
 First, a series of 8 interviews with creators who already crowdfunded: a filmmaker, a performing arts group, a social entrepreneur etc.
 It consists of three pillars.
 The toolkit – which will be launched in July – is a website targeting cultural and creative practitioners who wish to crowdfund their projects.
Finally, we introduced the MoneyLab Crowdfunding Toolkit.
  Preliminary results point out the size of the network directly impacts the amount of money start-ups raise, and that a strong social network with various types of fans and followers allow for different funding types, often recurrently.
 For this, she is looking into an impressive database of companies she collected from CrunchBase via open APIs, as well as their number of followers, fans and activity online.
 She aims to see how funding models have changed in this time and what role their social media management played.
S  have been raising their funds in the last ten 10-15 years.
Yang Song (Faculty of Economics and Business, UvA) discussed her exploratory study on how tech startups in the U.
 Zhao’s aim is to analyze how both formal and informal institutions shape the nascent practice of crowdfunding and to see whether this leads to “a Chinese theory of crowdfunding or theory of Chinese crowdfunding”.
 As a result, Chinese entrepreneurs face more risks and need to rely on informal (relation-based) institutions for their endeavors.
 Chinese institutions are not only more unstable due to an economic transition, but they embed different cultural practices (for example, the act of asking strangers to invest is in itself problematic, because family and friends networks are more important).
 ‘Western’ institutions strongly support the crowdfunding practice and its philosophy of tapping in strangers’ resources.
 He identifies the state’s formal institutions as major influencers on the type of environment in which entrepreneurship flourishes (“institutions include formal rules and informal influences, like cultural norms”).
 Despite major media outlets like Wall Street Journal reporting on the industry’s growth in the area, Zhao argues for a closer and more critical look.
Zooming out of the Dutch context, Ling Zhao, PhD candidate at the Amsterdam Business School (UvA), presented his study on crowdfunding in China.
 Dutch retail investors are inquired on their interest in investing via crowdfunding, while panel solar creators are inquired on their willingness to crowdfund, so that both parts are drawn together in the effort.
 His research looks into a long term (2014-2020) development of renewable energy in The Netherlands by means of interviews and surveys with various stakeholders.
Yet another different angle was offered by Thomas Gallas, VU masters student, who is tackling the field of renewable energy, which seems to be particularly fit to finance via crowdfunding.
 She hopes that insights from this experiment will help businesses make a more informed decision on what crowdfunding model best suits their idea.
 Internet users who agreed to participate in her experiment were randomly allocate to either donate, invest or donate for a reward.
Apart from value, do people have different behaviors when they donate as opposed to when they invest? UvA entrepreneurship student Lusine Shakhoyan created a fake crowdfunding platform with a real project that was raising money.
 Onderstal is currently looking into better selling mechanisms so that creators of campaigns can better determine the value of their own product and adopt the right selling mechanism to maximize their success chance.
 Why? The problem seems to be a different value appreciation and an inefficient selling model.
 A recurrent problem is that projects often do not reach their target.
Also related to  the donation amount, but this time from a behavioral economics perspective, was Sander Onderstal’s proposal to experiment with different auction models.
 The research is undergoing and worth checking when it will be published.
 Weak and latent ties donate less than strong ties, however.
 Their results showed that successful projects attract much more latent ties, and this is positively associated with Twitter social interaction rather than Facebook.
 Irma Borst and Rene Bekkers experimented with 10 Voordekunst projects in order to tentatively answer these questions.
 The question here is how can crowdfunding activate one’s latent ties (those outside the campaigner’s network – the real crowd) and how much are the latter donating compared to strong and weak ties.
 This is a burning issue, since campaign creators need to set much smaller target amounts than they would when applying to public subsidies, because crowdfunding works on small donations.
 It has long been a fact that often donation-based crowdfunding relies on one’s strong ties (friends, families and acquaintances), unlike the museum memberships.
 What will the dynamics be when both groups meet to support the same project? Will this make or break the monopolization of investments in equity crowdfunding?Discussions became more interesting when philanthropic behavior was viewed from a social network analysis.
 Current legislation proposals  provide a strict limit to the amount that non-accredited investors can pay for a project, while accredited investors invest much more.
 Could this pattern also apply in crowdfunding? Are small donators better ambassadors than big donators? Is there such a thing as an exclusivist circle of donators and investors? This might be very interesting to see in the equity crowdfunding.
 The interesting pattern here is that those who donate a small amount (such as 50 Euro) tend to be good ambassadors and encourage their networks to become donors as well, while those paying 100-fold that amount never do.
 Joris Ebbers from UvA Business School gave the example of established museums the likes of Stedelijk, Louvre or TATE, which allow people to become continuous donors that have different types of privileges, depending on how much they donate.
Crowdfunding might also be borrowing from the traditional membership schemes.
 Like in philanthropy, where trends show that people donate less when there is no suggested amount but tend to donate more when there is one, crowfunding tends to work the same way – it suggests different donation amounts (and the more you donate, the more perks you get).
 People donate to a crowdfunding campaign when they see their close network do the same, and like to share their support of a project.
 Bekkers focused on the role of social influence.
 This structure is also reflected in the way crowdfunding campaigns are built, particularly when they boost the donors’ reputation and reward their involvement (either with a material reward or just psychologically).
 He enumerated the seven reasons why which people “give” in the latter: there is a need (an initiative depends on their donation), they are solicited  to do it, they perceive the cost to be reasonable for the benefit it provides, it gives them a chance to be altruistic, it adds to their reputation, rewards them (psychologically), it matches their values, and they see the impact of their donation.
Rene Bekkers, from the VU Philanthropic Studies, made a succinct case of how crowdfunding employs traditional philanthropy models.
 What can we learn about from philanthropic studies, law and policy, linguistics, organizational science, social network analysis or entrepreneurial finance?, asked Borst, as she gave the floor to an eclectic mix of speakers, disciplines, and perspectives.
While existing literature already sketched the taxonomy of crowdfunding, multi-faceted research is essential and missing, Borst argued.
 2014 has already raised 60 million euro with a number of 81 active platforms.
 In The Netherlands alone, the amount of money raised through various forms of crowdfunding was 14 million euro in 2012, via 29 crowdfunding platforms.
 Irma Borst from Vrije Universiteit’s Organizational Sciences department offered some context around why this revenue model is popular – namely, the financial crisis that brought with it public and private fund cuts, a failing trust in banks coupled with an increased desire of people to control their investments.
The first session of the seminar introduced the current status of scientific research on crowdfunding.
 Together with Robert van Boeschoten, we also presented the latest version of the MoneyLab Crowdfunding Toolkit for Creative Industries as part of the Institute of Network Cultures and Hogeschool van Amsterdam.
 It gathered around 20 participants.
 The seminar’s first edition aims to bring together and connect various academics and researchers engaged with the alternative revenue model and map out current initiatives.
As a result, 12 presentations were held yesterday, June 5th at the Crowdfunding Hub’s location (the historic Beurs van Berlage, Amsterdam).
 Data and insights coming from the theoretical perspective are needed to support a truly structural growth.
 This, argued Ronald Kleverlaan, founder of the Hub, is essential as the industry is growing quickly and cannot rely solely on “trial and error” wisdom.
 The research seminar is thus a first attempt at connecting another important stakeholder in the industry:  academics and researchers.
Starting 2014, the Hub has organized monthly crowdfunding meetups but has so far gathered mostly entrepreneurs and crowdfunding platforms.
In this context, the initiative of the Vrije Universiteit (VU), Amsterdam Business School (UvA) and the Crowdfunding Hub to organize an academic research seminar on crowdfunding was more than welcomed.
 Should you happen to work with the former, it is furthermore difficult to be aware of other academic and research projects on the topic, since many are undergoing and yet to be published.
What is certainly true about the relatively new phenomenon of crowdfunding is that theory lacks behind practice.
Com – EuropeanNews Services, ParisAndrew Ross – professor and director of the American Studies Program at New York UniversityClay Shirky – Professor of New media at Hunter College New YorkLuc Soete – Professor of International Economics at the Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, Maastricht University & Research Fellow at the International Institute of InfonomicsCorinna Snyder – Trained as a cultural anthropologist, she works on topics relating to Lithuanian cultural production and as a general manager at Razorfish NYFelix Stalder – Researcher, University of Toronto & co-moderator of nettime international mailing list for net criticismCees Vendrik – MP for the Netherlands Green PartyMaurice Wessling -Bits of Freedom – a Dutch privacy and civil rights organization for the information societyNils de Witte – Netherlands Exchange for Angel Investments (NeBIB).
)Geert Lovink – Media Theorist and Activst, co-founder of nettime &
Initiator of Tulipomania DotComDavid Mandl – Journalist, writer, radio programmer, editor at Autonomomedia publishers, New YorkKorinna Patelis – Media Researcher, Department of Media and Communications, Goldsmiths College, LondonGuikje Roethof – Journalist, Former MP, CEO of Prezz.
Reinhold Grehter Member of the artist collective EtoyMichael Gurstein Sociologist, Associate Professor Management and Technology, Technical University of British ColumbiaDouglas Henwood – Investigative Journalist, Author of “Wall Street” & Editor of Left Bussiness ObserverHans van Heijningen – ATTAC NLJesse Hirsh – TAO Communications, TorontoOlivier Hoedeman – TNI – Trans National Institute of Ideas, AmsterdamDavid Hudson – Journalist and Editor of Rewired, Journal of a Strained NetGerd Junne – Economist, University of AmsterdamEric Kluitenberg – Media Theorist and New Media Program Co-ordinator, De Balie (Amsterdam)Richard Kramer – Consultant at Arete Research (London), and former technology analyst with Goldman SachsMichael Latzer – Deputy Director ICE – Research Unit for Institutional Change and European Integration, Austrian Academy of Sciences, ViennaAndrew Leyshon – Researcher and Professor at the School of Geography, Research Group Economy and Society, University of Nottingham & Editor of GeoforumJames Love – Director Consumer Project on Technology (Washington D.
Roberto Bissio – Economist, Executive Director of IteM – The Third World Institute in Montevideo, ChiliTed Byfield – Co-moderator of nettime, international mailing list for net criticism & free-lance book editorSteve Cisler – Writer, Analyst, based in San JoseKenneth Neil Cukier – Senior Editor at Red Herring Communications, London.
? Is it fair to say that we now have one digital economy, where e-communication and e-commerce co-exist? Is there a middleman in such digital economy? What forces distort and form market convergence and the emergent digital
economy? What does financial ownership mean in cultural terms? How can this convergence economy be regulated? Should it be regulated at all?————————————–
Preliminary List of Speakers
————————————–Nina Ascoly – Clean Clothes Campaign, AmsterdamAge Bakker – Ex-Director National Bank of The NetherlandsRichard Barbrook – Professor at Westminster’s Hypermedia Research Centre in LondonAlexander Bard – Commentator, majored in Economic Geography, works as a composer and record producer in Stockholm.
 Are there in fact differences between the market and policy frameworks in the U.
 The question the panel will struggle with is the potential implications of increasing vertical integration at both sides of the Atlantic, both on a regulatory level as well as a conceptual one.
The debate will shed a critical eye at market convergence by unfolding the dichotomies often used to talk about convergence notably domination/liberalization, content regulation/infrastructure regulation.
 The markets involved include Telecom companies, ISP’s, Cable operators broadcasting corporations, hardware producers, software companies, television production companies, film producers, on-line content producers, as well as retailers and wholesalers, producers, distributors and advertisers of all kinds of non-media products.
 On the other on how these media markets are been integrated with commerce markets (a non-benign process often referred to as convergence).
 On the one hand it looks at the dynamics of ICT and media markets, and the way in which old and new media are coming together.
Can the old categories of social analysis-class, strata, power–be used or be used in the same way to understand the new dynamics of the New Economy?Does the New Economy require what could be considered a new sociology?Is there an electronic class society developing, and, if so, in what ways does it differ from the traditional capitalist class society?Is money becoming secondary as the basis for social division, to be replaced by “attention” as the new “currency”- as a new medium of “exchange”- as an alternative “commodity” in the new on-line “barter” economy?Is an “attention” economy a post-capitalist one and if so what are its accompanying social structures?What happens to identity and systems of law and order if/when the nation-state becomes irrelevant?What happens to/with democracy in a networked world – is open source guided anarchy scalable?Do the sorting/indexing processes of an information society rather than the means of production constitute the new sources of social power?Who controls and rules the virtual world, and what are the deep links of this to the structures of power in the physical world?What does/would class struggle look like in a “New Economy” world?Who speaks for whom in an the information society?”And overall what are we to do?* Convergence, Mergers and MonopoliesThe panel on Convergence, Mergers and Monopolies has a twofold axis.
Questions formulated by the panelists:Class? Analysis? In the Networked? Economy?There is much discussion about a “New (Technology/Internet Enabled) Economy”.

How is the issue of privacy at stake?
What are the possible side-effects of Intellectual Property Laws?* Nettocracy – Class Analysis of the Network Society.
 Some of the crucial issues at stake are:How can accountability be guaranteed in the digital domain?
Are on-line ordering and home delivery really benefiting consumers?
The “No-Service-Economy” of the Net.
 This panel will discuss existing initiatives to represent consumer interests in the sphere of e-commerce.
In the absence of clear government policies, the role of consumer organizations becomes increasingly important.
 Yet, there is no clear idea how issues of accountability, privacy, taxation and regulation can be dealt with now, nor how they will be addressed in the future.
 Micro payment systems and cyber cash are still promises of the future, therefore the role of credit card companies is crucial in the current stage of development of e-commerce.
 Transnational transactions via the net not only create the possibility of international niche markets with direct interaction between producers, consumers, and specialized niche
intermediaries, they also conjure up countless problems around secure payment systems, the consumers’ fear of fraud, and issues of accountability of both producers and intermediaries.
 To what extent does it promote the interests of established dominant economic actors, and what opportunities for new players on the international markets are created? What does the New Economy look like from a “Southern” perspective? What is the experience from day to day practice in creating electronic
markets? And what could be the role of politics in this context, is there a need for
intervention or rather for laissez-faire?* Consumer RightsThe Internet creates a transnational consumer market quite unlike any market that existed before.
 This panel will investigate the new mechanisms of economic and social inclusion and exclusion that are created by the advance of digital networking technology.
While it is certainly true that digital networking can have tremendous inclusive effects, and can help to diminish the gap between economic, social and cultural centers and peripheries, it remains questionable if this will happen as if by an act of nature.
 Implicitly this vision presumes that in principle everybody has equal access to the networks and the on-line databases.
 Networking is considered to provide instant access to information and communication resources, as well instant access to electronic markets world-wide.
* Inclusion and Exclusion in the New EconomyThe promise of the perfect market on a global scale by the ideologists o the New Economy, bares traces of the old idea that the proliferation of the Internet and digital networking structures, as if by an act of nature, promotes a more egalitarian social and economic system.
The aim of this panel is not just to present the various initiatives, but to critically examine their potentials and pitfalls and find possible synergies among their strategies.
 Some advocate radical direct
action (Seattle, Washington), others public awareness campaigns (Clean Cloths Campaign, ATTAC), the “infiltration” of corporations through socially responsible investment, and shareholder activism.
 The heterogeneity of targets leads to a diversity of strategies.
) to transnational institutions (WTO, IMF), from the structure of the financial markets, to the corporate lobbying of the public policy process.
The complexity of this project is reflected in the variety of targets, ranging from individual corporations (Shell, Nike etc.
This panel presents a number of initiatives which take the realities of the New Economy as the starting point of their attempts to challenge this machine on behalf of neglected human considerations.
 The financial markets enable a relatively small number of shareholders to demand ever higher returns on their investments at the expense of virtually all other considerations.
html* Alternative Strategies:The New Economy is a transnational money machine.
com/siliconia.
[1] http://www.
This panel will examine different aspects of these attempts to redefine various entities: urban and suburban development, organizational logic, individual values, and networked environments.
 Gone are any references to the social, cultural, political, and material histories that define the region and its peoples – the “old” structures that the “new” logic of Siliconia must contend with.
In this rush to represent diverse regions as jacked into the globalization’s medium par excellence, the only remaining trace of a region’s peculiar qualities often seems to be the dominant geological formation appended to Silicon.
[1] The implication is that Silicon serves as a magical meta-glue that can bond technical innovation with financial acceleration to produce new potentials.
 At last count, over 90 regions world-wide were vying to promote themselves as 70 types of “Silicon” something: alley, valley, vineyard, swamp, seaboard, glen, fen, mesa, plain, gulch, glacier, and even a polder.
* Silicon Valley as a Global Business ModelWith the rise of the internet through the last decade, “Silicon Valley” has been transformed from a quirky scattering of suburban areas south of San Francisco into a success story of mythical and global proportions.
Following the keynote talks, this discussion will focus on the validity of these commonplace assumptions and on a few obvious questions: Where did this idea of a “New Economy” come from? How “new” is this economy, really? To what extent can – or cannot –faith in these assumptions make the New Economy a self-fulfilling prophesy?We’ll also want to sort out the winners and losers, their rewards and penalties, whether this latest chapter in economic history represents a very real transformation or simply a mass hallucination.
 Cheerleaders on round-the-clock financial news cable channels and naysayers on the streets of Seattle alike often base their opposing positions on platitudes that may have once seemed radical but now have all the shock value of a banner ad: Matter doesn’t matter anymore; electronic networks have collapsed time and space; “infomediaries” aside, the middleman is dead; intangible assets are genuinely valuable while tangible assets are merely a burden; in short, the industrial age has finally given way to the information age.
00 – Cinema De Balie goes Wall Street——————————–
Workshops & Seminars:
——————————–The program will include a series of workshops and impromptu smaller scale meetings on the following topics:1 – Development Finance and the Global Market Network
2 – Financial Cryptography
3 – International Venture Capital
4 – ATTAC——————————
Summaries of Debates
——————————* The New Economy – Premises and PitfallsThe idea that the global economy has undergone such fundamental changes that it can truly be called “new” has become so widely accepted that it’s rarely questioned outside certain academic circles, critical journals and conferences like this one.
00 – Close of the Conference22.
00 – Closing Plenary Session(Moderated discussion)19.
15 – Coffee Break17.
com, London)
Michael Latzer (ICE, Vienna)
Heath Row (Fast Company, Boston)17.
com, Paris)Speakers:
Richard Kramer (Arete Research, London)
Korinna Patelis (Goldsmiths College, London
Kenneth Neil Cukier (Redherring.
00 – Afternoon Session IIDebate:
Convergence, Mergers and MonopoliesModerator:
Guikje Roethof (Prezz.
00 – Lunch Break15.
00 – Afternoon Session IDebate:
Nettocracy: A Sociological Analysis of the Virtual ClassModerator:
Geert LovinkSpeakers:
Michael Gurstein (Technical University of British Columbia)
Alexander Bard, (Business Analyst, Stockholm)
Richard Barbrook (University of Westminster, London)14.
00 – Coffee Break13.
00 – Conference Resumes / Morning Session:Debate:
Consumer RightsModerator:
Eric KluitenbergSpeakers:
James Love (Consumer Project on Technology, Washington)
Wibo Koole (Netherlands National Consumer Organisation)
David Mandl (Autonomedia, New York)
Maurice Wessling (Bits of Freedom, Amsterdam)12.
30 – Plenary SessionPublic Debate:
Inclusion and Exclusion in the New EconomyModerator:
Geert LovinkSpeakers:
Andrew Leyshon (University of Nottingham)
Age Bakker (Ex-director Netherlands National Bank)
Roberto Bissio (Economist, Chili)
Cees Vendrik (MP Netherlands Green Party)* SATURDAY JUNE 3:11.
00 – Dinner20.
00 – Afternoon Session IIDebate:
Alternative StrategiesModerator:
Felix StalderSpeakers:
Jesse Hirsh (TAO Communications, Toronto)
Nina Ascoly (Clean Clothes Campaign)
Greenpeace Representative – tbc
Olivier Hoedeman (CEO, Amsterdam)
Hans van Heijningen (ATTAC NL)
Gerd Junne (University of Amsterdam)18.
00 – Coffee Break16.
com)
Nils de Witte (NEBIB, Netherlands)
Andrew Ross (New York University)15.
30 – Afternoon Session IDebate:
Silicon Valley as a Global Business ModelModerator:
Ted ByfieldSpeakers:
Clay Shirky (Hunter College, New York)
Steve Cisler (Writer / Analist, San Jose)
Corinna Snyder (Razorfish, New York)
Reinhold Grehter (etoy.
30 – Lunch Break13.
 of Infonomics, University of Maatsricht)
Doug Henwood (Financial Journalist, Left Business Observer, New York)12.
30 – Plenary Debate IThe New Economy – Premises and PitfallsModerator:
David HudsonKey-note Speakers:
Luc Soete (Inst.
00 – Opening
Welcome by Andree van Es (Director of De Balie)10.

——————————————–
Main Topics of the Conference:
——————————————–* The New Economy: Premises and Pitfalls
* Silicon Valley as a Global Business Model
* Financial Markets and Regulation
* Convergence, Mergers and Monopolies
* Inclusion and Exclusion in the New Economy
* Consumer Rights in the New Economy
* A Critical Assessment of Alternative Strategies
* Nettocracy: A Class Analysis of the Information Society
* Gift Economies and Free Services
* The Public Sector and the Network Society
* In Defence of Internet Culture—————————-
Preliminary Program:
—————————-* FRIDAY JUNE 2:10.
By bringing together critical discourse in these different domains we intend to find alternatives to deadly adapt-or-die rhetoric, as well as to dire structural inevitability (aka “There Is No Alternative”) or simplifying activism.
 To facilitate this exchange of knowledge is a prime aim of the conference.
To achieve this a dialogue has to be started between critical economic analysis, critical net discourses, and the premises of policy making, as well as the various social movements that operate in this domain.
The conference aims to set an agenda for possible models of intervention in this new domain of networked communication, and to reclaim vital public functions of the new information and communication environments.
 The aim of the conference is to raise the level of economic competence of the cultural and social sector, and simultaneously inject economic
analysis with a sensitivity to on – and offline cultures, as well as a hands-on understanding of the new communication spaces.
——————————-
Aim of the Conference
——————————-The conference Tulipomania DotCom intends to develop an informed critique of the politics of electronic finance and internet economics.
 The introductions to the reader can be found on De Balie’s archive.
The reader was produced in the immediate aftermath of the event and was published on July 29, 2000.
Themes:
The New Economy: Premises and Pitfalls;
Silicon Valley as a Global Business Model;
A Critical Assessment of Alternative Strategies;
Inclusion and Exclusion in the New Economy;
Consumer Rights in the New Economy;
Nettocracy: A Class Analysis of the Information Society; Convergence, Mergers and Monopolies.
 Produced by De Balie (Amsterdam) and Frankfurter Kunstverein (Frankfurt).
 Editorial team: Ted Byfield (New York), Menno Hurenkamp (De Balie), Andreas Kallfelz (Frankfurt), Eric Kluitenberg (De Balie), Geert Lovink.
Concept: Geert Lovink.
 The event was held on 2-3 June 2000 in Amsterdam in De Balie and on 4 June 2000 in Frankfurt in the Frankfurter Kunstverein.
This predecessor of MoneyLab was conceptualized late 1999 by Geert Lovink and Eric Kluitenberg and intended to develop an informed critique of the politics of electronic finance and internet economics.
Thanks to Eric Kluitenberg the reader of the Tulipomnania DotCom conference has been retrieved and is available online and for download as PDF at the Institute of Network Culture’s ‘Publications’ section.
Official announcement can be read here (click the Call for applications PDF to see the full responsibilities and requirements).
 Eligible candidates include (social) entrepreneurs, representatives of NGOs, representatives of crowdfunding platforms, universities and research centers with interest in this alternative revenue model.
Following that statement, the European Commission has now officially launched a call for applicants to create an expert group on crowdfunding.
 This expert group would furthermore develop a ‘quality label’ in the industry, namely to promote transparency and best practices.
As discussed in a previous post – Crowdfunding regulation developments and possible implications – Part 1: Europe – one of the recently proposed initiatives of the European Commission was to establish an expert group that would inform it about crowdfunding.
 Founder and Lead Service Designer/Developer of the Social Exchange Platform Pendo (www.
 Currently he works as web content coordinator in Maastricht.
 After graduating from the university of Salzburg and South Korea he started as producer and video journalist.
 By Bernd Alexander Used works:Bernard Lietaer; The Future of Money; 2001Bernard Lietaer; New Money for a New World; 2012Sally Wyatt; Rsearch paper: In danger! Metaphors at work; 2008David Kahn; The Codebreakers; 1965Leonard Shlain; Art & Physics – Parallel Visions in Space, Time and Light; 1991McLuhan and Barrington Nevitt; Take Today: The Executive as Dropout; 1972Tim Jenkins; What Comes After Capitalism; 2012David Graeber; The First 5000 Years of Debt; 2011Ashley Montague; The Human Revolution; 1965Kenneth Clark; Civilisation; 1969McLuhan & McLuhan; The Laws Of Media; 1988Mats Lewan; An impossible invention; 2014 Description about the author:Kapeller Bernd Alexander raised from Paternion, Austria.
 It seems as if providing new cures for old fears is a bad guide to inform present social actions.
 His “Future of Money” presents a rearview mirror image of a time long in the past.
 As much inspiration he provided for practitioners and engineers to put the oldest wine into the latest bottles he fell short of his own ambitions.
 Lietear has plead guilty to call currencies almost two decades ago.
The invention of Andrea Rossi and the independent confirmation of the existence of the phenomenon (LENR – low energy nuclear reaction) in 2011 paves the ground for the motivational schemes Mr.
 Since much like preliterate men who lived by the gift or “the bounty of nature”, post-literate men has yet come to terms with its modern equivalent.
 They might have misread the conditions in which this apocalypse is taking shape.
 These die-hards are convinced that the financial apocalypse is near and the righteous will be admitted to a save heaven if they hold sway.
 Some apologetics of monetary alternatives want to see the total abduction of the conventional monetary system.
 Jenkins enlarged perspective one can learn much about the present moment then can be illustrated here.
 Lietaers findings into Mr.
By plotting Mr.
 A process made explicit by McLuhan & McLuhan already in 1979.
 In practice it transforms “credit” into “reputation” in the same way as “paper promises” have been transformed into “the poor man’s credit card” at the transitory point of money from Gutenberg to Marconi.
 In theory it is a simple zero sum accounting system, robust and self-regulating.
 the structural differences with hardware based exchange systems; Of which fiat money is his preferred reference point.
 its complementary and 2.
 Bernard intuitively posits mutual credit systems as Yin systems to explain 1.
 As David Grabener demonstrated again, as the backlog for gauging debt, that it was this process and not barter that predates hardware based exchange systems.
 Lietaers goes further in his exploration formalizing the oldest information exchange system known as gifting.
 Techne served as the inspiration for science as well as for art.
 Yet one of the Greek words for art is techne, for she was also its goddess, and the Greek ver tikein (“to create”) is derived from her name.
 Shlain only provides the starting point into this large terrain when he states “Before the rise of reason began to suppress the hegemony of mouth in classical Greece, the patron goddess of practical knowledge was Techne, from whose name we derive our word “technique,” carrying within it the idea of step-by-step scientific investigation.
 The fact that scientific laws are subject to change in the same way as all technologies are subject to men’s innovativeness is barely accepted.
 In such societies, notions of nature or physics showcase time as disjointed and space as frayed and disconnected.
”And it should not surprise us that much more than our left frontal lope got conditioned by the creation of a new service environment.
 800; for the preceding five centuries no layperson, from kings and emperors downward, could read or write.
 Kenneth Clark states on this note that “in Europe of A.
” Between the ascent of civilization and its descent, the only period in which literacy was vanishing in the West was between the Fall of Rome and the 13th century.
 In our own time most of us have grown so accustomed to the life of each for himself that it is difficult for us to understand that for the greater part of man’s history every man of necessity lived a life of involvement in the welfare of his fellows.
 The violence’s that have been attributed to his original nature have, in fact, been acquired predominantly within the relative recent period of man’s cultural evolution.
 Ashley Montague makes this eminently evident and seems to confirm David’s Grabners contention of the origin of violence and the Barter Myth: “The fact is that as man has advanced in civilization he has become increasingly, not less, violent and warlike.
 They are found in abundance from prehistory till pre-Socratic times.
 Such societies are characterized by an egalitarian outlook that corporately and privately exhibit mutual trust, cooperation and sufficiency.
In short, his findings indicate the periods in which the Yin style exchange systems rule are those in which literacy rates are low or non-existent.
 Lietaer is able to observe his “structural solutions in the monetary domain”  with the coming of modernity.
 It also explains why Mr.
 When these domains are aligned one has no problem to extrapolate their contours into “The Deep History Of The Brain” (1999, Daniel Lord Snail).
In the past 5000 years the correlation between Exchange Systems: Feminine connection (See slide 2); Exchange Systems: Changing concepts of Time and Space (See slide 7) and Exchange Systems: Complementary Currencies (See slide 4) overlap surprisingly well.
 They are widely held as the hallmark of civilization itself so much so that they are protected by UN charters.
 Jenkins is the occurrence of Yin type exchange systems since the invention of these two important cultural techniques (numbers and writings).
” What makes Bernard’s model fit the larger scheme of Mr.
 Mitchell Inness sums it up quiet accurately: “Information-based exchange systems are the original type of exchange system, operating from the dawn of history before writing or numbers were invented.
 In Bernard’s scheme complementary currencies are lumped together as instances of the Yin archetype.
 Lietaer’s Yin/Yang model (Slide 6).
 Jenkin’s distinction between hardware and software exchange systems coincide with the structural differences identified by Mr.
 Never the less he discovered an important connection that becomes apparent in the thoughts of Tim Jenkins outlined in his paper “What Comes After Capitalism” (2013).
 And might have found more comfort in his accomplishments as an Investor and Central Banker.
 He would have saved himself the time pointing out the “blind spots”.
As a former student of classicism he would only have to align the insights of literary scholars Albert Lord and Perry Miller and fully appreciate the attempt of Leonard Shlain’s superb “Arts & Physics” to reach planetary understanding of these “general shifts”.
P in her book Vico’s Science of Imagination explains the dilemma; “Vicos art of reading the hieroglyphics of the sensus communus of humanity has its degenerate components in historicism and the contemporary concern with methodology in the humanities”.
 But he did not manage to break the same spell that inflicted Vico Giamattista’s work as well.
” In his latest book he devotes the last two chapters elaborating on these “general shifts”.
 Seen from this perspective, these currency innovations fit into the general shift towards Yin priorities highlighted earlier which includes changes in the paradigms in science and medicine, politics and gender relations.
 Was it not Niels Bohr who remarked that “the opposite of a fact is a falsehood, but the opposite of one profound truth may very well be another profound truth” ?Having proceeded from his observations he concluded at the end of his first book “The ongoing money innovations are more compatible with co-operative, feminine-type interactions….
 By conscious design of the monetary environment and its parameters we can now engineer desired economic and social processes free from ideological baggage.
 Lietaer demonstrates that the reverse is also true.
 He saw how to manage the climate of the monetary environment by managing the interest levels.
 Keynes demonstrated was how to control economic processes by manipulating the monetary environment.
In short, what Mr.
 With a startling surprise.
 Lietaer’s work rediscovered it for the Marconi Galaxy in “New Money For A New World”.
 While Keynes discovered the dynamics of money as a Gutenberg medium in “Shakespeare and the Profit inflation”, Mr.
 Today when John Maynard Keyne’s – the challenger of neoclassical economics and founder of modern macroeconomics – ideas find feverish support, librarians face an equally a sharp rise in demand for esoteric literature.
 He brilliantly illuminates for the popular mind the emperor’s old clothes and renders the blind spots of his adversaries tangible.
 As the first popular theorist of money in the post-money and post-information age, he writes with rare clarity about his hunt for “systemic solutions” and informs the reader about his findings.
 Bernard Lietaer to attribute the “Information Revolution” as the obvious ground in his “Future of Money”(2001).
 Ask your town newspapers’ Editor in Chief or your neurologist!Thus, it seems natural for Prof.
 And while “the totality of life on this planet” is indifferent to personal homemade videos it is the environment-as-private-resource that transforms culture, society and man’s sensibilities.
 As a fact, the whole environment becomes one’s private resource.
 Anyone uploading his homemade video onto Youtube is in command of a multi-billion dollar service environment.
 This statement is not meant to downplay the service environment built around fiat money.
 Byrne cryptograph “it requires nothing more than a cigar box and a few bits of strings and odds and ends for its operation”.
The international system of currency, counter to its powers to “determine the totality of life on this planet” is a rather dull engineering subject.
 Perhaps protection against public incredulity is the best vaccine of those immune to the current economic epidemic.
 Semmelweis’s practice find widespread acceptance among the members of his profession.
 Only long after his death did Mr.
 By the same token, financial activists have discovered that the conscious design of monetary systems could have similar effects.
 His insight saved the lives of thousands of young mothers.
 It could not have occurred to him what is a pressing question for Sally Wyatt: “Why does neoclassical economics, dominated within the economics profession, continue to adhere to models of equilibrium and stasis, especially when physics itself has largely abandoned them?” Could it be that we are also linguistically still servomechanisms of our own technological ingenuity?In the 19th century Ignaz Semmelweis discovered that the incidents of puerperal fever could be drastically cut with the use of hand disinfection in obstetrical clinics.
 His aim was to give Astrology a scientific tint.
 Adam Smith, the father of modern economics, first wrote about the “invisible hand” in his unpublished book on the History of Astronomy.
 The russian physiologist known primarily for his work on classical conditioning which not only won him the nobelprize in 1904 but influenced popular culture such as Thomas Pynchon’s ‘Gravities Rainbow’ (1973).
 Pawlow’s ability to create a controlled environment than him explaining conditioned reflexes.
 The same people are more fascinated with Mr.
Some people suggest that the latest generation gap is neurological rather then ideological.
Report: Irina Enache for INC.
 Nevertheless, it’s worth looking into how the next conference rethinks the Bitcoin discourse and what developments will take place in the meantime.
 An interesting decision, as Asia has a somewhat controversial position in relation to Bitcoin.
Last year’s edition of the conference  took place in San Francisco’s Silicon Valley and the organizers say they target Asia for next year’s location.
 However, this is inevitable, given Bitcoin’s growth (and hype) and there is plenty of development going on to support the independent Bitcoin user as well.
 Some of the startups that offered Bitcoin trading accounts required as much identification bureaucracy as any bank, charged high fees and seemed to address investors predominantly.
 I had the sense that some startups were venturing (pun intended) quite far from Bitcoin’s core concepts: anonymity, freedom, minuscule fees and an increased awareness of one’s financial power.
 Yet the Bitcoin world has more stakeholders than just startups, and the conference seemed heavily-focused on the business perspective in all tracks.
  Third – as innovators: they are the ones considering new technical possibilities.
 Second – as intermediaries: they could provide extra safety and insurance for new Bitcoin users, thus helping the currency get traction.
 First – as businesses: their collaboration with regulators could very well define how future legislation will look like.
 And, as I learnt from the panels, these startups can play a big role in the future of Bitcoin.
 It’s a good time to have a Bitcoin start-up.
 I knew only a few names, and that’s because most have just launched.
I also walked along many Bitcoin startup-ups in the exhibition space.
 What I also would have liked to hear more about is how Bitcoin engages with the wider scene of alternative revenue models, such as mobile money and crowdfunding.
 I particularly enjoyed sessions that had good moderator, rather than incoherent Q&As from beginning to end.
 This is far from covering all debates – I practically only attended a quarter of them due to the parallel tracks, but wished I had been present at way more.
 It was certainly refreshing to attend a more thorough debate o the history of money and Bitcoin economics, to notice that data and consumer protection are rising concerns, to learn that freedom of speech is associated with freedom of spending and how this leads to financial censorship, or to join the reality check on Bitcoin’s promise to bank the unbanked.
 The broadening scope and debate on Bitcoin was well reflected by the conference’s diverse program.
Content-wise, it was impressive.
 There seems to no longer be a conflict in terms of “to regulate or not to regulate” but rather an acknowledged fact that Bitcoin needs to fit in the legislation – and it’s up for all stakeholders to participate and determine how that legislation will look like.
 Other speakers, such as Johan Gevers (Monetas) argued that Bitcoin need not wait for regulation, as regulation follows practice and the best thing Bitcoin startups, users and researchers can do is be pro active.
 Lars Christensen also advised Bitcoin startups to not go under the radar with their activities and to be as transparent and regulation-friendly as possible, so that future legislation does not catch them off guard.
 This is essential as senators pick up the news more easily than they do from lobbyists.
 Criticism was drawn on irresponsible journalism that tends to paint Bitcoin in one color, whether critical or over-optimistic.
 That’s not just entrepreneurs, cautioned Hoffman, but all types of stakeholders, from coders, merchants, civil society, think tanks and academics – the broader the spectrum of arguments when it comes to Bitcoin, the more suited to expectations the future legislation will be.
 Insights from the Bitcoin industry are essential for them.
 Marcia Hoffman, for examples, emphasized how in the US, lobbying is essential as senators are not only extremely busy, but tend to be generalists with the bills they propose.
Pro-activeness of the Bitcoin community in regards to legislation was the often heard as an advice from speakers coming fromm the legal/policy making background.
 Their advice for the Bitcoin community is to be neutral, respect user privacy (not to ask for more identification than is legally required), avoid terms of service that are too restrictive, and get involved in the regulatory fight in order to make if favorable to the Bitcoin community.
 The most common excuses for financial actors to censor someone are violation of terms of service violation, trademark violations, the “know your customer” regulation, and government  pressure.
 Other, perhaps less impressive – such as the Chase Bank closing the bank accounts of adult entertainers – show that often these decisions can be arbitrary.
 Wikileaks, then blocked on reasons of illegal and criminal activity, is not the only case of financial censorship.
 The two advised operators and users of Bicoin to be constantly aware when they are protected in their endeavors and when to retreat.
 This has interesting implications for the Bitcoin community and the currency’s role in politics.
 Freedom to have a political speech also includes financially supporting a certain party.
 First Amendment, while commercial speech is less protected and violent ones are not protected at all.
 Political speech is highly protected by the U.
 Freedom of speech is protected on different levels.
The two offered valuable insights in the correlation between freedom of speech and freedom of spending.
 This was delivered by Rainey Reitman and Marcia Hofmann from the Electronic Frontier Foundation.
 What should Bitcoin developers, users and startups then be aware of?In the light of the recent approval of Bitcoins as a way of supporting political parties and elections, but having in mind the notorious episode when Wikileaks had their donations blocked by government pressure on Visa, Mastercard and PayPal, some advice on financial rights and censorship was most welcomed.
 Regulation, he mentions, is often too restrictive with new developments.
 There is a paradox here though: while investors and big merchants are cautious in adopting Bitcoin precisely because they have no legal guarantees and clarity, should regulation be installed, most of the smaller Bitcoin operators would lose the game as they could not afford the costs of financial audits, respective money-laundering rules and following best practices.
 Regulation, predicts Christensen, is bound to happen.
 The analogy belongs to Lars Christensen from Saxo Bank: “until some light regulation will be in place, Bitcoin will not be embraced by merchants and investors”, he added.
 We have seen it before with online trading, when critics said no one would ever trust the Internet with their money”.
Legal clarity is essential for Bitcoin to gain wider trust and adoption: ” if people don’t trust it, they won’t use.
 How then can future developments address this target group more suitably? Perhaps this is a good topic for next year’s panel on financial inclusion.
 Alternatively, they voluntarily turn to Bitcoin as an alternative.
 These are essentially people who voluntarily refuse to use banks and other intermediaries because of privacy concerns, high fees, lack of trust.
 What Bitcoin can realistically do is serve as a financial inclusion tool for those “unbanked by choice” – right now, a growing phenomenon in South America, as explained by Rodolfo Andragnes, co-founder of the Argentinean Bitcoin Foundation.
 He further drew attention to the fact that most Bitcoin third party operators only want to offer global financial inclusion in order to increase their consumer database.
 Yonni Assia from eToro also commented that, for the latter category, we need to rethink what “financial inclusion” means for those who do not earn anything or those who work in black markets.
 However, he points out, Bitcoin can only address middle and high class citizens of those areas, and it is unreasonable to expect that Bitcoin is the right tool for the very poor.
 In his opinion, the future of Bitcoin is strongly reliant on the mobile phone as a platform, and converges with existing M-PESA services.
 The telecommunication services are very reliable, and people are giving up their feature phone for Blackberries and Smartphones, since they are now made as cheap as 20 $.
Peter Smith, one of the founders of Blockchain Info, shared a different perspective: the level of development in east Africa (Nairobi)  has been outstanding in the last years.
 Hence, Boase argued, we must ask whether Bitcoin needs to be the right inclusive technology in Africa’s case: pushing Bitcoins in underdeveloped societies is somewhat irresponsible.
 What he has found out is that “the street finds its own use for technology” – in this case, using cheap phones and existing M-Pesa exchanges are currently more effective than Bitcoin.
 Boase also criticizes how (reputable) media has often irresponsibly portrayed the role of Bitcoin in Africa, exaggerating both its potential as well as the zealously reporting on non-existent developments.
 Second, to use Bitcoin you need to be online – cheap data and constant wifi are essential, and that is not the case in most areas in Africa.
 For one, teaching users on how to create a wallet and exchange Bitcoins is a much tedious process.
 His practical experience so far makes him doubt Bitcoin’s feasibility.
 Boase was recently returned from Kenya, where the non-profit he works for – the UK Digital Currency Association – is carrying different projects on implementing Bitcoin there.
 Could Bitcoin then be an answer? Richard Boase, a journalist and collaborator at Coindesk, thinks this questions needs a much more critical analysis.
 Intermediaries in remittances are anything but helpful, as Safahi ironically remarks: “we might as well not spend all that money in foreign aid but rather cover those people remittances fees – it would be just about the same”.
 Alan Safahi, CEO of ZipZap, a company that “builds railways for Bitcoins” started the debate by mentioning the 2,5 billion unbanked people of the world, almost half of which live in extreme poverty.
 At the moment, crypto currencies simply do not deliver the promise they were hailed to accomplish.
The panel on “Bitcoin and Global Financial Inclusion” offered a more realistic answer to Gevers’ ideal.
 Johann Gevers predicted the future of Bitcoin and its underlying technology as follows: in 5 to 10 years, everyone will mainly use their mobile phones as universal platforms to which they can connect and be financially included.
 One example that was also mentioned in the conference was the Danish liberal party that proposed using the blockchain technology for an internal voting assembly, as this would make the whole process less prone to manipulation and allowed voters to follow if votes are securely and fairly stored.
 I think Ethereum has an interesting list of activities that decentralized technology could completely reshape: “voting, domain names, financial exchanges, crowdfunding, company governance, contracts and agreements of most kind, intellectual property” etc.
 Johan Gevers from Monetas repeated what he said at Amsterdam’s last year’s conference: we need decentralized communication, decentralized law (made possible by smart contracts, for example), decentralized means of productions ( like 3D printing).
All these innovations were contextualized within the general trend of Bitcoin-like technology to decentralize society altogether.
 Possible solutions to this are multi signature transaction and multi signature wallets, which essentially refers to implementing different checkpoints that prevent opportunistic attacks.
A top concerns remains security, especially with Bitcoin getting traction.
  Hence, the digital identity debate is particularly interesting to follow in the next stages.
 But, as cryptographer David Schwartz from Ripple Labs clearly stated, it is really not about what technology can do, but what we agree on to be the best solution.
Whether Bitcoin should go for a (anonymous) distributed identity system – so that users can control their identity – or whether using one’s real ID is a matter of further debate.
 At the other end of the spectrum, projects like Dark Wallet aim to offer complete anonymity to Bitcoin users.
 This might inevitable if, as discussed especially in the regulation panels at the conference, future legislation will require start-ups to provide insurance and further security for their clients (in return for a fee, arguably).
  Interestingly, many third party operators that exhibited at the conference were requiring all sorts of identity verification – from Bitcoin ATMs requiring fingerprints to intermediaries requiring valid IDs.
There is an unresolved discussion here, though.
 The digital identity of a Bitcoin user would, as Bitcoin core developer Jeff Garzik explained, a way for users to interact in the market.
 This is an underdeveloped idea, but analogies to this could be examples like DigiID (residents in the Netherlands have a digital identity which helps them communicate much faster with authorities, social security and banking services).
 Jacob Boersma from Innopay mentioned that Bitcoin is on its way of creating a system where users can identify themselves by giving as less info as possible and never more than is necessary.
 For readers in Amsterdam, Ethereum is hosting a workshop on how to create your own smart contract on Tuesday, May 27th)Another novelty discussed was that of using digital identities in the Bitcoin exchange.
 Here is a tutorial by Ethereum on how to create, for example, a smart contract for a new alt coin.
 The potential of smart contracts is that they can allow all sorts of distributed applications (from creating digital currencies to crowdfunding and even voting) by coding the exact conditions in which the applications are to be executed.
 They thus require minim trust and, theoretically, leave no place for manipulation.
 ‘Smart contracts’ are, in a simplest explanation, computer coded contracts that aim to replace current human-made contracts.
 The concept of ‘smart contracts’ has been made know by projects like Ethereum or BitCloud.
 So what are the newest developments to tackle these concerns?Last year’s conference heard little on smart contracts, but this year they are the way to do business .
 Clearly though, Bitcoin needs to improve its security and protection  in order to become competitive.
 The reason why Bitcoin has not switched to securing accounts with passwords is because that involves storing them – a huge risk that also brings further costs.
 Losing that means losing the account forever.
 For examples, as speakers from the panel on “Data security and consumer protection” pointed out, a user can only access their Bitcoin account with their private key.
 Bitcoin is different in the sense that its users need to be more aware when they use it.
 This is inevitable, since the current financial actors (banks, financial intermediaries) take on big risks and operational costs to protect their customers and offer them extra services (like secure internet banking, for example).
 With it come growing concerns for consumer and data protection.
Bitcoin is getting more mainstream.
 This time, technological developments are more tied to debates on legislative frameworks and concerns like consumer and data protection, enhanced security and privacy.
Bitcoin 2014 sees a different discourse than the last big conference in Amsterdam in 2013.
 Cuende also sees a conflict between anonymity and legal transacting – according to him, people should not shy away from sharing some form of identification – the cryptocurrency’s legitimacy depends on this.
 What Cuende though sees as the essential pillars for Bitcoin to become mainstream are a common law framework to target cryptocurrencies, a strong net neutrality (but, he pointed out, clearly not the controversial one that EC recently proposed) and a serious exchange system (legal, backed by big VC, located in a country with strong regulation but Bitcoin friendly).
There is currently no pan-european proposal to regulating Bitcoins, but I think an initiative similar to that in the case of crowdfunding monitoring might be a feasible idea for Bitcoin too.
 concluded to maintain its position as an observer and called for a group of informal experts (crowdfunding platforms, startups, academics & researchers, financial authorities) to establish best practices and represent the interests of various stakeholders to the E.
 After publishing the results of the research, the E.
 What the European Commission did in this particular case was to launch a survey and get insights in different perspectives of crowdfunding and what levels of legislation is desired at the moment.
 Currently, EU countries have taken on themselves to propose national legislations, some more though than others (see a recent overview I wrote on this topic).
These discrepant perspectives reminded me of crowdfunding (especially the equity-type), an alternative revenue model that finds itself in the exact same legislative confusion.
 Switzerland and the Isle of Man seem to currently be a Bitcoin paradise as transactions go unregulated and Bitcoin is regarded as an interesting phenomenon.
 In Finland, Bitcoin is a commodity while in Sweden it’s an outright means of payment and operators need to register with financial authorities.
 Denmark considers Bitcoin transactions “purely private”, so it does not tax Bitcoin revenue, but nor are losses deductible.
 Germany goes further in consider it a unit of account (as discussed earlier, this is essential in Bitcoin’s next step) and does not tax capital raised via Bitcoins.
 That does not stop it from taxing it.
 France, albeit being generally tolerant to alternative revenue models, does not consider it a proper currency.
 In the Netherlands, Bitcoin is not considered a viable alternative to the basic functions of money.
According to Cuende’s research, official (but also legislative) perspectives on Bitcoin within the European Union differ greatly from one member country to another.
 His interest lies in the potential of Bitcoin and how it can be integrated in the digital economy of the EU.
 The speaker, Luis Ivan Cuende, is assistant to Neelie Kroes at the European Commission and was named best programmer in Europe under 18 .
 speakers and exhibitors, one presentation I was particularly interested in was ‘What Europe needs to build a digital economy’.
Given the overwhelming number of U.
 The role of these Bitcoin intermediaries and providers was discussed throughout the conference, as I will highlight later in this post.
 There were Bitcoin ATM-creators launching the latest models (like Lamassu), Bitcoin e-wallets providers (Coinbase), proponents of alternative banking via equity crowdfunding and Bitcoins (Bank to the Future), coders of open source payment protocols (Ripple Labs), powerful Bitcoin mining machines (BitFury), etc.
 Many of them were third party Bitcoin operators, offering extra services around the Bitcoin infrastructures.
Judging by the number of exhibitors at the conference (+40), it’s flourishing.
 This argument was counteracted though by Erik Voorhees who, in the previous panel on the history of money, said that people tend to trade more as the value of Bitcoin rises because they feel wealthier – this explains why the startups present at the conference see more transactions when the value of Bitcoin rises, not when it goes down.
 Graf suggests that the amount of money circulating in the society is not a critical point at all, while Sams requires a more elastic supply and mentions that a more relevant problem is that people do not trade their Bitcoins but rather hoard them, as deflation rises their price.
 One solution, suggests Matonis, is that we can always go the right or left side of the decimal to increase its quantities.
Finally the panelists gave their opinions on what will happen after 2140, when Bitcoin mining will reach a halt.
 Graf believes a Bitcoin reserve bank should be possible just so that people at least have an opt-out possibility from current banks, while Sams does not see an option of hypothecating Bitcoins and thus no  future of a Bitcoin reserve bank.
 All these can be examples of new banking opportunities.
 Teigland argues that we should not get stuck in Bitcoin alone, since there are numerous financial models and instruments out there, including crowdfunding or digital and gaming currencies, time, skills, or local currencies.
The fourth question tackled the possibility of Bitcoin as a reserve bank.
 At the other end of thinking thread, theorist Konrad Graf sees only one crypto currency really going mainstream.
 Teigland sees the potential of alt coins as local currencies, however is aware that their value will always be below mainstream currencies.
 Robert Sams, founder of Kryptonomics (a London-based crypto-finance firm), believes that, while alternative coins will flourish in the next years, many will fail, leaving room for only a couple of solid ones that can really gain traction.
 Here opinions varied.
The third questions concerned the possibility for multi-standard values.
 Robin Teigland, Associate Professor at the Center for Strategy and Competitiveness at the Stockholm School of Economics, suggests that Bitcoin could turn from an agreement of exchange to a unit of account but that it takes 30 to 40 years (in other words, a new generation) to mentally adopt any disruptive technology such as Bitcoin.
 Šurda believes Bitcoin will never become a proper unit of account unless the dollar collapses – until then, the former benefits of legitimacy and power.
The second question asked how Bitcoin can transit to a unit of account.
 What the panelists agreed on is leaving the debate over the regression theorem aside altogether and acknowledge that we cannot ask last century theories to account for today’s innovations.
 Fiat money, since its decoupling from the gold standard in 1946, is not so different in this sense.
 Only following significant interest did it became valuable.
 It was a “thing”.
 Bitcoin seems to violate the theorem – when it was created, Bitcoin had literally no value.
 When people get more interested in an object, its liquidity rises.
 As Bitcoin theorist Peter Šurda carefully explained, the regression theorem refers to how currency, before becoming medium of exchange, is thought to have an intrinsic value (the case of gold or any other liquidity that became traded as currency).
The first question asked how Bitcoin fits in the regression theorem of Ludwig van Mises and whether this economic theory, that helps explain the origins of money, is relevant in the Bitcoin context.
 It was a welcomed choice, as mainstream economics so often attempts to (in)validate the Bitcoin concept but never goes too deep into the problems.
 He set out with a punctual list of questions and skillfully guided the speakers to answer them.
 John Matonis, Executive Director of Bitcoin Foundation, did a good job at moderating.
I particularly enjoyed the panel on “The Economics of Bitcoin”.
 Hence, the proposal of this panel is to discuss Bitcoin in light of its potential to switch economy from coercive centralization to mutual-consent decentralization – a recurrent proposals throughout the conference.
 There was no real need to do so other than the banks’ and politicians’ desire to make fiat money from nothing, Voorhees argued, and this has led to a coercive centralization of fiat money worldwide.
 This is particular to the case of the US, after it decoupled the value of the dollar from the gold standard in 1946.
 It is this centralization that no longer works for the present day economy.
 Centralization of money, argued Erik Voorhees – early Bitcoin supporter and CEO of Coinapult, an application that facilitates Bitcoin transfers to e-mail and mobile phones – is a reflection on the centralization of trade, since Amsterdam was a strategic trading point not only for the Netherlands but internationally.
 The one titled “History of money” particularly set out to answer the question above, albeit jumped directly to Amsterdam’s history, and specifically to how various currencies circulated in the Dutch economy before the Dutch Exchange Bank centralized them.
I was delighted to see two different panels on Bitcoin and its relationship to monetary history and theory.
Here are the most intriguing questions and ideas debated at the #Bitcoin 2014 conference, for each track accordingly.
 This report resembles a rather personal journey in the #Bitcoin2014 conference, but covers insights from all tracks.
These four tracks ran simultaneously throughout the conference, hence I had to zigzag my way from one track to another, motivated by some topics more than others.
The program of the conference was tailored to a wide range of interests, with 120 speakers, 40 exhibiting startups and four major tracks of discussion: economical, technological, legal, and social.
The audience felt the same – over 1000 attendees from at least 50 countries could be found from at the Amsterdam Passenger Terminal from Thursday, May 15th to Saturday, May 17th.
 If you ever wanted to attend a Bitcoin event, this is the place to be” said John Matonis, the Executive Director of Bitcoin Foundation, in the opening key note address.
“This is the Bitcoin conference of the year.
Money Project Trailers:  .
 Dette Glashouwer will be at the MoneyLab conference in March, as part of the Critical Art Practices session.
 She has played these abroad, from New York to San Francisco, Berlin to Riga, Nairobi to Durban.
Now, she is doing stand up economy, a series of artistic performances related to the subject of money and its alternatives.
 Dette read books on the history of money, the different psychological money-types and how how this moneysystem never allows sustainable living.
 However, after taking a money workshop in Oslo and being asked to teach it to people in Amsterdam, she dove deeper into the subject.
 She spoke with scientists, visionaires, philosophers and out of the box thinkers to get an answer on her question: ‘what is money, how does this moneysystem effect our planet and is there an alternative, is transition possible?‘Dette Glashouwer states that money never interested her and that she used to feel fear when she thought about the subject.
 She traveled to America, Norway, Istanbul, she performed in theaters, festivals, people’s homes, at banks and Timebanks.
 At the time the financial crisis broke out and peakoil came closer, Dette Glashouwer lost her income.
 After 21 years of collaboration, the theatre company came to an end and so did Dette’s job.
Dette Glashouwer was one of the founders and directors of the Dutch theater trio Suver Nuver.
”By: Jolien Siemerink, MA New Media & Digital Culture.
*The research by Maurice de Hond is not for publication, if you have any questions please contact
Rutger van Zuidam or Vincent Everts.
 Question still remains in what form Bitcoin will be able to get out of its niche and into the regulated wallets of the main public.
 That is the conclusion of the pro and con site of the National Bitcoin Congress.
When I asked Rutger van Zuidam what he, as the organizer of the National Bitcoin Congress and Bitcoin enthusiast, found of all the arguments and how this affected his opinion, he stated:Bitcoin, much like the Internet, is not going away.
 There is no necessity for Bitcoins in the Netherlands, but for the sake of a backup system it is good to know what our options are.
The fact that I myself was at a Bitcoin conference that discussed how we can incorporate a new crypto currency into the Dutch companies is a large step forward and shows belief in the role that developers and entrepreneurs alike have in the next revolution and maybe a bank of the future.
 De Jager believes that this is partly the reason why the Euro still works.
 There was a political will, a commitment, and a belief that the Euro needed to work.
 However, the European Union had trust.
 Bitcoin sees similar skepticism as the Euro at first.
These regulations might come, according to former Minister of Finance of the Netherlands, Jan Kees de Jager.
 But for this to happen in the USA we, again, come back to the fact that there needs to be more regulation.
 What if we can use Bitcoins to help third world countries to a solid currency without the hassle of banking? Van der Chijs noticed that during a conference he attended in New York there was a new crowd, much like the Dutch crowd who were interested in these options that crypto currency offer.
 In some countries bank accounts are expensive and in other counties they might be corrupt or non existing.
 As normal as it is for us to have a bank account, this is not a wordily given right.
The lack or need for banks is also what could make Bitcoin interesting for third world countries.
 This is what made him look at Bitcoins and this is also the reason why he is now investing in Bitcoins and other forms of crypto currency.
 He just could not get his head around the fact that he was not allowed to withdraw his own money from his bank in Cyprus, at an institution he pays for to hold his money.
 He explained this appeal by a personal example of Cyprus.
 This new banking form that Bitcoin offers was also appealing to Marc van der Chijs, Managing Partner at Cross Pacific Capital.
 The bank of the future, the social network of money.
 He carefully explained that Safello should not be seen as a border exchange office but as a new bank.
 He wants to make Safello the bank of the future.
Frank Schuil, the CEO at Safello Sweden, offers a solution to this problem.
 We need to find its flaws, and secure it against cyber criminals before the Dutch National Bank will give guarantee for its value as they do with for example the Euro and the dollar.
 Policy Officer on innovations and cyber security for De Nederlandsche Bank, Kim Gunnink, explained that before we can take Bitcoin out of its niche and into the main public wallet, we need to regulate it.
So maybe Bitcoins where really just for the niche audience as explained by Hearn.
 Stichting Vluchteling is the first Dutch foundation to accept Bitcoins and was therefore invited by van Zuidam and Everts to promote their cause during the Dutch National Bitcoin Congress.
 Also I felt a great guilt for not being able to send the Bitcoins to giro 999 in support of Stichting Vluchteling during the break.
 For the first time (as an Apple enthusiast) I found a glitch (not being able to use crypto wallets), which, in this crowd, made me, feel like I was from an ancient era.
 That’s because I, and a large percentage of smartphone users like me, have an iPhone.
There I was, sitting in the Bitcoin-savvy audience with my first own Bitcoins burning on my chest on a beautiful Bitcoin value card I received when I entered the congress, and no phone crypto wallet to put it in.
 Even so, there is still the option that Bitcoin might fail like Linux 2000 once did.
 He was the first speaker to emphasize the niche appeal and how we should not just embrace Bitcoins but accept that it might take a while longer to catch on.
 Given that Hearn actually writes the Bitcoin code and also sees the possibilities in using Bitcoins, I find his remark on how Bitcoin is currently more appealing to niche groups rather than to the mainstream audience to be liberating.
 It failed miserably in the eyes of Hearn.
 He compared Bitcoins, a revolutionary idea, to the development of Linux 2000 when “everybody” was over the moon about the innovation and possibilities of this system.
 Hearn gave the example of people who did not want their money handled by the current banking institutions.
 Because the code is transparent and can be applied to multiple causes, it is interesting to see what niches can be filled.
 Mike Hearn, who left Google to be become an entrepreneur and who is a Bitcoin Core Developer, sees Bitcoin-related possibilities having more of a niche appeal.
The appeal that Bitcoins have on the mainstream audience was put to test by the next speaker.
 The Dutch were early adopters of the search into a currency fitting to this digital age and therefore front runners in accepting the challenge that “we need to rethink our strategy that the Internet will go away” (a quote from the famous New Yorker Cartoon by Tom Toro).
The maturity of the Netherlands when it comes to its e-commerce space is applauded throughout the congress.
 He sees Bitcoin as an alternative for the next big banking crisis and is happy the Netherlands presents itself as the Silicon Valley of money 2.
 People are going to want predictability, he argues.
 Demeester ended his Bitcoin talk by looking at the banking system as it currently is.
 He explains the easiness of Bitcoin: “people want a bank in their pocket”, just like Steve Jobs showed that we could have 1000 songs in our pocket with the iPod.
 Right now consumers ask for control and flexibility, according to Demeester.
 Yet, like petroleum, crypto currency has raised the bar.
 Demeester stated that, like petroleum, the new contender Bitcoin does not have a history and still needs to prove itself.
Tuur Demeester, an economics publicist, used the example of how whale oil became obsolete when we were able to extract petroleum.
 The trend of this Dutch National Congress seems to be a comparison to wordily events that led to revolutions.
 The industrial revolution was when machines multiplied our muscle power and, stated Mayer; in this day and age it is data that multiplies our minds.
 Mayer explained that Bitcoin should be compared to revolutions.
 In that form, just looking at the code as a way for communication, everything that can be decentralized will be decentralized.
 Bitcoin is censorship resistant and unshackled from political whims, he says.
Trace Mayer, Entrepreneur and Bitcoin investor, took me back to my college days when he explained how the power of Bitcoin is all in the code.
 In their press release* it states that:Knowing that a large part of the Dutch population has heard of Bitcoin, regardless of whether their impression is positive of negative, gives an interesting start to the debate at the Dutch National Bitcoin Congress.
But what do people living in the Netherlands think of Bitcoins right now? ‘Yes’ or ‘No’? Van Zuidam and Everts asked Maurice de Hond, well known for his research and polls, to see what the popular opinion is in the Netherlands on Bitcoins.
 He suggested it would be best to take a step as a next generation bank and take a good look at Bitcoin to see if ‘No’ can in fact become ‘Yes’.
 Iske gave this example as a metaphor for the current Bitcoin situation.
 First you will see the word ‘No’ but when you walk around the art piece the word ‘Yes’ appears.
 Reatz created images that are intended to be completed inside the viewers’ own head.
 Iske gave the perfect example with the Binocular View artwork from Markus Raetz.
 He explained the location, and the enthusiasm of the ABN Amro as a next generation bank to be on top of social innovation.
 (Paul) Iske, Chief Dialogue Officer at ABN AMRO.
Everts and van Zuidam introduced the first speaker, Prof.
 This National Bitcoin Congress promised to be something big.
 More to the back, other men were pacing, lost in silenced mumbling and practicing their speeches.
 These were the men who are today’s big spenders, questioning society out loud and offering Bitcoin as the tool for the next revolution.
 The crowd on its own was an interesting site to see.
A man in a green suit, who turned out to be Vincent Everts himself, was running around in the (quite young) audience.
 A payment system that perhaps has the potential to change banking as we know it.
ABN Amro, one of the Netherlands major banks offered their Dialogues House to be the stage of presentations and discussions around this new payment system.
 If it is that easy, why was I not using this myself? How is it that not all Dutch companies are already integrating this feature into their payment systems? I tackled these questions at the congress.
 The easiness of the Bitpay system got me even more curious.
 I wanted to see how we (iBrokers Travels, my employer) could integrate Bitcoins by use of Bitpay invoices for our villas, chalets and yachts around the world.
 To top that off, he arranged a meeting for me with Moe Levin, Director of European Business Development at Bitpay, on Wednesday beforehand.
 At least that is what research from Maurice de Hond showed – 0% of women in The Netherlands have used Bitcoins! Or was it because I use iOS, and Apple has set out to make Bitcoins difficult to use by not letting crypto wallets into the App Store?Luckily, I got an invitation from Rutger van Zuidam, Ecommerce entrepreneur and Bitcoin specialist, to attend the Dutch National Bitcoin Congress that he organized in cooperation with Vincent Everts, on Thursday, May 15th at the Dialogues House in Amsterdam.
 But as I learned during the National Bitcoin Congress, I might have missed it because I am a woman and Bitcoins are just beyond my interests.
 Was I that wrong? I am usually right when it comes to predicting trends.
 Mostly because I thought it would blow over.
 I’ve never had the urge to get into the whole Bitcoin phenomenon.
 For one simple reason, I don’t own any.
 Even though I am well educated in new media and digital cultures and, of course, on a personal level very experienced in online shopping, I have never bought anything with Bitcoins.
Below is her report of the event:” It’s all in the code – report from the Dutch National Bitcoin CongresI started the day as what veteran Internet users would call a Newbie.
 She attended the congress with a professional interest – as her company recently started accepting Bitcoins as payment – as well as a personal interest – to hear what Bitcoin is all about from different speakers.
Jolien Siemerink holds an MA in New Media and Digital Culture at the University of Amsterdam and currently works for iBrokers Travels.
 Jolien Siemerink attended the congress and wrote a detailed report of how it went.
The other one was the Dutch National Bitcoin Congres held at the Dialogues House (ABN AMRO) on Wednesday, 14th of May.
One of them was the Bitcoin 2014 international conference that took place from Thursday 15th to Saturday 17th of May (report on this will follow soon on the MoneyLab blog).
Two important Bitcoin events took place last week in Amsterdam.
 An illustrated version of this text can be found at:http://new-tactical-research.
 In the end the coins are too locked into the desire to be seen as art to be able to function as the universal signifier of value which is money, and so these coins (whether valued and collected or not) are destined to remain just art.
 The project most closely resembles a limited edition fine art prints, that take the deceptive appearance but not the actuality of money.
 Its apparent sophistication is to a degree limited to surface appearance.
 And intensifies the commodity fetishism that lies at the heart of the dilemmas we all face.
 By emphasising the ‘intrinsic artistic value’ of the artefacts Peperkamp renders the project complicit with the status quo.
 But in the end the central contradiction is serious.
 It has the potential to expose systemic and malign contradictions in a fresh and original way.
 Within its own terms it is both a rigorous and ethical piece of work leading us to ask important questions about just how the world of finance became so detached from the everyday world.
 More than most, Peperkamp and the others who are behind the Kunst Bank have taken considerable material risks and have done so without public subsidy.
 Its flaws are generative rather than fatal and make it more significant than many boring success stories.
This is not to dismiss this project.
 The long term value of the objects that surround us are no more or less predictable than any artwork.
 We are surrounded by commodities whose exchange value may appreciate or depreciate over time, from cars to furniture.
 The selection of gadgets in which swift obsolescence is a key part of the business model is misleading.
 He deploys easy of gadgets such as laptops or iPads, which unlike art begin to lose their value at the moment of acquisition.
In his presentation Peperkamp went on to claim a special status for art as exhibiting features that make it unlike other commodities.
 By seeking to maintain arts’ status as a ‘super commodity’ whose mysterious value accumulates over time Peperkamp weakens the project as both experiment and as art.
 Unlike Peperkamp, Warhol never spoke about quality.
Sadly this loyalty to a traditional forms of connoisseurship, that mysterious process through which value is conferred transmuting base metal into artistic value, separates Peperkamp from Warhol’s cynical realism in which economic or exchange value is seen as the true source of arts’ potency.
 Peperkamp inadvertently revealed a key weakness when he declared that in his presentation that the bank only selected “good artists to create the coins”.
 The Kunst Reserve Bank emphasises the opposite impulse; the desire to hoard value.
 Unlike labour power, land or commodities money is the least lumpy and most mobile expression of value.
  Money should flow, that is why it is why it is called ‘liquidity.
 The systemic role of money is the very opposite of the ‘intrinsic’ value that this project seeks to re-inject into money.
 The “money form” is but a single moment in the creation and circulation of value as it moves from the money form to the commodity form to the labor form.
In some ways the questions that hang over Kunst Reserve Bank are also at work in the overall logic of the MoneyLab conference, the risks of looking at money as an isolated moment outside of the system of relationships that is the wider political economy.
 At that point there will be 25,000 coins in circulation which according to Peperkamp is the critical mass that is suggestive of some kind of as yet unimaginable transition, the suggestion is that at this point the currency could start to circulate rather than just be hoarded and becoming the “universal equivalent” and signifier of value we call money.
 After 5 years the bank will be wound up and the project concluded.
 The final dimension of cunning that accompanies the project that it is not open ended, it is finite.
 A reminder that the bank doesn’t store our money in their safe waiting we are lending our money to the banks.
 In many ways this is one of the most interesting aspects of the project as a mirror of the fractional banking system as it currently exists.
Real banks have only a capital reserve of 3% which makes the Kunst Reserve Bank triple A rated and ensures, Peperkamp jokingly declared, “it conforms to the Basel norms to at least 2040 “.
 There would be no bail out.
 If there were to be an actual 2088 style Northern Rock run on the bank they would go bankrupt.
 So it’s a gamble that the “intrinsic value” of the coins will outweigh the impulse to make a quick profit and convert the value of the coins back into “real money”.
 90% of the income goes into maintaining project (the costs of minting the coins and other elements of the infrastructure are quite high).
 This represents their reserve capital.
So what security is there against a large number of holders of the currency arriving to demand their money back? The answer is that for every 100 euros that people pay for the coins 10 euros is put in the safe.
 This means that as good little capitalists the exchange rate of the art currency is set by the market.
 Every morning, like the Libor exchange rate, they cut of the top  and bottom bids to arrive at an estimate of the actual trade value of the currency.
 From this process they estimate the current market value of the coins.
 So if you visit the site you will find their ‘dealing room’ where the coins are traded among the public.
 When they observed this they decided to integrate this into the project.
 Though the coins are showing up on e-bay with an asking price of 150 euro.
 So far very few coins were returned.
 But Peperkamp and his associates reason the incentive to keep the coin is also very high because they may reason that as a piece of art its value may appreciate at an even faster rate.
 One would have thought that this would make the incentive to return the coins is very high after all the 10% rate of interest outstrips and actual retail bank.
As this is not legal tender (in other words its not really money) how does the purchaser trust the value of these coins ? Because, and this is what gives the project traction, you can go back to the bank and you can exchange your coins at any point for the original cost with an annual rate of 10% a year non-compound interest.
 The Art Reserve bank thus creates coins which have an artistic value and are issued in a limited amount.
 The offer is only available for one week.
 Every month an artist, are selected to design 4 coins, and every coin is issued for one week only in exactly one hundred copies.
 Every month an artist, some well known others less.
 It is a fairly basic but well thought through and rigorous process.
 With this mint they create the coins.
 They have a teller, a safe, and a mint.
To begin with the bank actually exists as a physical entity with the three basic components required for some of the economic first principles of primitive accumulation or hoarding of value.
 It benefits from its fatal flaw and so has the qualities of its defects.
 It is thus a genuine experiment.
 Even if it is (as I suspect the last of the three) it is still a remarkable achievement in part because unlike most artistic experiments the artists have created the possibility of failure (bankruptcy).
 One of the real achievements of this art Bank is that it is not immediately obvious whether it is a genuinely radical experiment, a brilliantly conceived  Ponzi scheme or an interesting but conceptually flawed piece of conceptual art.
 Just maybe Kunst Reserve Bank might be an unwitting contender for the role.
8 millionNot many artists have been able to trump Warhol’s position of uber-capitalist and cynical realist of contemporary art though many have tried.
 Forty-seven years later, in November 2009, the same piece expected to fetch between $8 million and $12 million, in the end reached a record $43.
” In the 1962 Warhol took the art of making money, literally, with the Dollar Bill series of silk screes prints on canvas entitled 200 One Dollar Bills.
As so often Warhol paved the way long ago for a knowingly cynical take on the special status attributed to art when he declared that “Making money is art, and working is art and good business is the best art.
 Among those who took a defiantly tangible approach to the money question was Ron Peperkamp, artist and CEO and brain-lord behind the Kunst Reserve Bank.
 But not everyone who presented was on (digital) message.
  The conference was set up to consider “digital experiments with revenue models, payment systems and currencies… and critically explore, map and probe the politics, inner-workings and governance of these alternative digital-economic forms”.
By David GolumbiaThe Kunst Reserve Bank was one of a number of projects presented at MoneyLab a conference held last month in Amsterdam that launched the latest research thread from the Institute of Network Cultures.
Read the full interview on Max Haiven’s website.
 But some of it is tremendously moving, aesthetically, intellectually and politically.
 Most of that art is bad, lazy and boring.
 So, with this hypothesis in mind, I went out looking for the most tactile trace of this overlap between art and finance and I discovered that hundreds, maybe thousands of artists are using money as media.
 After all, pieties aside, in an age of postmodern dematerialized art practice, when we have abandoned any “metanarrative” by which to judge art’s “true” value, the value (especially the economic value) of a work of art is essentially a conspiracy of belief too.
 What real wealth does a credit-default swap represent?So I asked myself: where else can we find a sphere of activity where largely arbitrary value is assigned to largely immaterial things and sustained by a culture of belief and credibility, but which has ramifications that resonate throughout society and culture? Art seems to be the place.
 Stock and bonds allegedly represent some underlying real-world economic reality, but there is a sort of suspension of disbelief at work that pervades the financial markets which I find fascinating and terrifying.
 Second and related, I was interested in whether there might be some merit in understanding these financial assets as techniques of representation, as aesthetic practices.
 After all, even though they make up a huge percentage of the volume of global wealth, financial assets like these are, for all intents and purposes, made up out of thin air and their value only exists so long as there is a buyer who believes in it.
 First, the way the value of financial assets like “collateralized debt obligations” and derivatives contracts are essentially conspiracies of belief.
 I became increasingly interested in two things.
Vadim Zakharov – Danae                                 Ervin Esen – MisspentWhat inspired you to do this project? Why do you think the topic is relevant?For a few years I’ve been researching the cultural dimensions of finance capital, both in terms of the cultural norms, behaviours, and beliefs that make the financial industry “tick” and also in terms of the way finance influences culture more broadly concerning art, popular culture and everyday life.
 I also am writing some academic and some non-academic essays on this topic, and I’m bringing together some collaborators to do an edited book in a few years, which will include both critical essays and reproductions of artwork.
 And last fall I curated a space called A People’s Bank in Halifax (Canada) for Nocturne, the city’s annual all-night arts festival.
 I teach a course on the topic at the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, where I work.
com) and I think there are now over 350 examples, most from different artists.
 I have started “collecting” art that mobilizes money as a medium or theme on a Tumblr site (moneyandart.
The project has a few components.
Finally, it’s a more theoretical exploration of the idea of money as a form of representation, and of art as a unique but revealing commodity in our age of “cognitive” or “communicative” capitalism, when creativity is marketized as never before.
Second, the project is part of efforts to unpack the changing influence of money over art (especially contemporary visual art) and aesthetic politics at a moment profound global crisis.
) as a medium or that comments or represents money through other media.
First, I’m trying to track and interpret visual art that uses money (coins, bills, banknotes, credit cards, etc.
 What is your Reimagining Money project about?  It’s a project through which I’m seeking to explore three things at once.
 2, Issue 2) of CRIT.
 This interview appeared in the spring 2014 issue (Vol.
 More information can be found at ReImaginingMoney.
 In a previously unpublished interview conducted in October 2013, Haiven corresponds with IMPAKT Festival (Utrecht, Netherlands) about his multifaceted research, teaching, collection, exhibition, event and publishing project about the cultural dimensions of finance capitalism and the radical imagination.
Max Haiven is an assistant professor in the Division of Art History and Critical Studies at NSCAD University.
 as well as comparative analysis with initiatives in Europe.
 Yet how about untapping crowdfunding’s potential here? What are the challenges and why not carry a survey for the cultural sector specifically? What can be improved there?There will be a follow-up to this post with the current legal development of crowdfunding in the U.
 Furthermore, although non-profit crowdfunding (which is currently employed mostly by the cultural sector) is acknowledge as an important revenue model for artists & creatives, it triggers very little interest legal-wise as it possesses less financial risks.
 Yet I hope that contributors are interested in truly supporting local projects with an impact rather than diving into for-profit speculation.
 A pan-european legislation is quite possible, as it is simply more effective in allowing platforms to operate cross-borders and create legal certainty for all participants.
 Others, like Italy’s strict rules on who is eligible to participate, might do the opposite.
 Certain legal provisions – like France’s max investment rule of 1000 euro/project is welcome as it invites a diverse crowd to participate in a single project, and it specifically encourages inexperienced investors while still protecting them.
 Clearly, crowdinvesting and crowdlending platforms will need to take up much legal responsibility.
 For now, it is worth monitoring the effects of the legislation that has been voted.
All in all, we can expect that legal initiatives will be proposed and refined in other EU countries in the coming years.
 Italy is, so far, most specific on who can use crowdfunding.
 Not just anyone can own an equity crowdfunding platform – they need to be either a bank or meet certain criteria of professionalism.
 bank, financial corporation, incubator) who invests at least 5% of the capital offered.
 Furthermore, it is only valid if the project has at least one accredited investor (i.
 According to legal provisions, only ‘ innovative startups” (those that invest in R&D or employ researchers) can use the model.
The Italian context
Italy was the first country in the EU to implement legislation on crowdfunding.
 A lender can contribute a max of 1000 euro per project in order to attract a wider pool of supporters, but there are no further limits to how many such contributions one can make.
 Donation models are subject to existing payments laws but no further legal provisions, while for profit crowdfunding platforms need to respect transparency rules, a quality label and offer correct guidance to investors/lenders.
The French context
The recently proposed French legislation is less constraining and thought to best reflect the industry’s expectations.
 Proposed limitations are of 1 mil euro/project, a max of 3000 euro individual financial contribution/project and a max of 6000 euro individual crowdfunding contribution/platform.
 These platforms will be required to register with authorities and the central bank, posses initial capital, and are subject to big fines if they act otherwise.
The Spanish context
Similar legislation was proposed (but not yet voted) in Spain, where the focus is on protecting inexperienced lenders and investors.
 Obligations often include a minimum of financial resources (to assure solvency), ensuring that projects will run despite the platform’s own insolvency, protecting and rightfully informing consumers, providing conflict resolutions etc.
 They need to mediate the relationship between startups and investors/lenders and protect both sides.
Overall, the new rules seem to place a lot of (legal) responsibility on the platforms themselves.
 For the crowdlending model, there is also a minimum of financial resources that platforms need to have in order to protect themselves from potential failures.
 Equity crowdfunding platforms however think this will disconcern contributors, taking the ‘ crowd out of crowdfunding’ and leaving space only for accredited investors.
 This is argued by authorities as a way to protect inexperienced investors from investing too much in startups, given that 50% to 70% of these are said to fail within their first year.
 For the crowdinvesting model, the most debated legal provision is the limitation of one’s investment to 10% of one’s net assets in crowdinvesting during one year.
 The legislation concerns crowdinvesting and crowdlending specifically.
WITHIN EU: NATIONAL LEGISLATIONS ON CROWDFUNDINGThe British context
A legal framework for crowdfunding is already active in the country as of early this month.
 A pan-european legislation for it might be hard to apply and thus it might hinder its growth.
 It is hard to even place crowdfunding under a specific authority and regulation at the moment.
 The reason the author gives is that each EU member tackles legislation and financial models differently; financial models and products might report to different authorities and regulations within the state.
 Another opinion from CrowdfundInsider however agrees that it is better to first observe crowdfunding before imposing legislation.
 It advocates for pan-european legislation in this matter, to make the adoption and functionality smooth.
 acknowledgement of the potential of crowdfunding however express concerns that national regulations on crowdfunding might fragment the market and create difficulties in cross-border expansion.
 For example, the European Crowdfunding Network welcomed the E.
This decision has been commented by actors involved in crowdfunding.
 Main reason for this decision is that an European legislation might be a burden for the incipient model of crowdfunding, while a lax approach might decrease trust and might lead to fraud and losses.
 has, for now, decided to not intervene with a proposal for a pan-european legislation but rather monitor the evolution of crowdfunding (in all its models), as well as national legislative proposals.
All in all, given somewhat disparate perceptions of the crowdfunding practice, as well as moderate call for pan-european legislation, the E.
 Nevertheless, the request for public (EU) funding in supporting the crowdfunding platforms, project or expert institutions is currently low.
 For example, a need for coordinating self-regulation at EU level for financial return crowdfunding is supported by 42-44% of the respondens and for non-financial forms – only by 31%.
 This might explain why there is a stronger call for EU support for these two models.
 There are furthermore specific risks perceived in regards to equity and lending models: fraud, money laundering, IP theft, project failure, money loss, no legal structure in place to protect stakeholders.
 This is despite the fact that crowdfunding was generally perceived as model designed for cross-border functionality.
 For example, only 38% of the platforms operate cross-border due to authorization costs and little know-how about foreign legislations, although more than half would like to do it.
Of course it’s crowdinvesting and crowdlending that pose significantly more issues.
 Only one third of survey respondents mentioned that further support from the EU (namely for the legal uncertainty).
 81% of the platforms operate cross-border.
 The crowdsponsoring model (where not financial return is involved – such as the donation model) is doing well.
As expected, different crowdfunding models have different needs.
 Another uneven response rate I came across is that all respondents who are contributors are male (do less women donate / invest / lend to crowdfunding campaigns? Why? Or did they simply not fill in the survey?).
 Why so? Perhaps a lack of awareness, perhaps a unequal dissemination, but it could also be that the people who responded were those who were already more inclined to support pan-European legislation, as a pointed out in NowStreetWire.
 No input was given from Maltese or Norwegian stakeholders.
 Interestingly, almost half of all response were from France and Germany, with UK, Italy, UK, Spain, Austria and Belgium each holding from 5 to 8% of the total responses.
 Almost half were people who have contributed or might consider contributing to crowdfunding campaigns, 152 were project owners, 81 were crowdfunding platform owners and 91 was catalogued as academic, banks, business angels and venture capitalists (a rather chaotic category) and finally 10 replies were from national regulatory authorities.
The survey had roughly 900 respondents.
 chose not to dive into this at the moment has to do with some insights from the survey.
 The reason why the E.
 has outlined the following proposals specifically for crowdfunding:These proposals are just the first steps to a possible pan-european legislation.
Some of the above issues however do not have any current legislation to tackle them, hence the E.
 In some EU countries, some of the issues are tackled by existing and developing national legislation.
 As for IP protection, earning a patent that is effective in the whole EU for this purpose might be made possible by upgrading the current patent system.
 In the case of money laundering, an uniform transaction threshold, as currently discussed under the Anti-Money Laundering Directive and Regulation 1781/2006, might be a solution.
 identified (guided by the survey results) are as follows:For some of the raised issues, there are ways in which the EU existing or currently-upgrading legislation can cover.
Key issues that the E.
 However, the report cautiously mentions that crowdfunding is still an emerging model and cannot be used to replace public or bank funding.
 The potential of crowdfunding is thus mentioned not only in terms of direct finance access for these target groups, but also in beneficial side-effects such as creation of new jobs, earning new skills, new channels of testing and marketing a product/service etc.
 The recent cuts in public budget and the effects of the financial crisis are acknowledged, together with the sensitive position of cultural sector, as well as social enterprises in this context.
 is aware that , unlike the latter models, crowdfunding addresses the creative & cultural sector, as well as the sustainable startup scene.
 recognizes that the growth of crowdfunding is significant – the funds raised in 2013 via it is comparable to the revenues raised by business angels and venture capitalists, even if far from the established bank-lending model.
In the communication release, the E.
 A couple of weeks ago, it released the survey results as well as a communication of its position in regards to the topic.
CROWDFUNDING LEGISLATION IN THE EUROPEAN UNION?Late 2013, the European Commission launched a survey that targeted the main stakeholders in the crowdfunding industry, asking their opinion on whether the EU should engage in creating a pan-european legislation.
 The focus is on an pan-european legislation as well as national ones, but a follow-up and comparison with developments in the US is on its way.
What are the prospects for a pan-european legal framework for crowdfunding? What does current legislation in some of the EU countries involve? What are the implications for the stakeholders (crowdfunding platforms, funders/investors and those who use it – entrepreneurs, innovators, cultural practitioners, artists etc)?I would like to give an overview of the current legal developments (interesting things are happening!) on crowdfunding, discuss some prospects and implications.
 Others are uncertain – such as an pan-european regulation of crowdfunding.
 Over the last year, some legal frameworks have already been developed – the case of the United States and certain EU countries such as Italy, Spain, France and UK.
 With 94% of all crowdfunding activities taking place in EU and US, the latter have taken more and more interest in it.
 Its potential has already been tested for a few years now.
Compared to mobile money or crypto currencies, crowdfunding is a more clear and stable revenue model.
 Crowdfunding, however, might soon not be.
 One point of differentiation is the legal framework nexus – ‘alternatives’ are, for now, outside of it.
 ‘Alternative’ in this context is defined in relationship to mainstream finance models.
At the ‘MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives’ conference, we discussed crowdfunding as an alternative revenue model for the creative sector.
 // Noppes // Qoin // Next Nature Network // Fundus Theater & Geheimagentur // Peerby // Share NL // a Bitcoin ATM // Transition Towns Netherlands // Kunst Reserve Bank.
 Come and meet the people directly engaged with alternatives, and get involved!Bazaar participants: Timebank CC.
 Each organization is presenting a different type of exhibition, from books and flyers to visual installations and experiments.
Saturday, March 22: Alternatives bazaar & film programA number of organizations involved with alternative finance/currencies will be present throughout the day, looking forward to meet visitors  for acquaintance, discussion, exchange of ideas and advice during the breaks or sessions.
 You can also sign up at the registration desk on Saturday 22, but best save a spot ahead of time.
org; mention the time slot you wish to attend.
  Please sign up at rsvp@networkcultures.
 Crowdfunding workshop for advanced: 16:00-17:00The workshop is included in the ticket price.
 Crowdfunding workshop for beginners: 14:00-15:004.
 Crowdfunding workshop for advanced: 11:15-12:153.
 Crowdfunding workshop for beginners: 09:30-10:302.
 Here’s what we have in store for you:Friday, March 21: Four crowdfunding workshopsOrganizer: Teach2fishTime slots:1.
Meanwhile, at the INC & MoneyLab headquarters:
We are preparing the conference, but also the complementary events.
Read the article here.
In a recent article on the World Policy Journal, Dette Glashouwer talks about her Money Project which you will be able to find out more about at the MoneyLab conference, where Dette will hold a theatrical performance.
  The next wave of business models will be at the agents level providing value added services already existing on the mobile money platforms to increase their profit margins.
  The telcos are facing threats to their fundamental revenue models, but they do not want to open up their platforms fearing competition and being relegated to dumb pipes.
The failures are inevitable since mobile money is a bolt-on the monolithic single function switching & billing systems on which the telcos run their operations.
 The challenge that I see in this case is that the consolidation is creating larger walled gardens and virtual monopolies, which are bad for innovation and customer service.
 The consolidation provides helps raise the barriers to entry for competitors therefore protecting future revenues.
 On the other hand consolidation is inevitable in any maturing sector, business line and among business models as the growth rates slow, market becomes saturated and profit margins start going down.
 How do you look at this from an industry perspective? Is this phase of consolidation inevitable?SM: Mobile money is driven by telcos which require scale to capitalize on the opportunity, hence the mergers to acquire customers.
GL: Like anywhere, mobile money in Uganda is producing its own stories of mergers, failures and downtime.
 There are successful case studies that show boots leveraging regular transactions as a measure of credit worthiness and increasing commerce by reducing the cost of transactions (in remote rural areas transport costs can be as high as x10).
However, like any other business, economies of scale are key, so yes existing social structures are the basis for getting the regular & consistent transaction plus providing a level of trust, education & support for the informal operators.
 The Kenyan success story is one of pivoting a product by Safaricom, which gained speedy traction due to the security risks of carrying & transacting with cash.
SM: Mobile Money may have become famous through Mpesa from Safaricom in Kenya but its origins can be liked to Phillipines and Indonesia where farmers actually use mobile phones to pay bills, and receive money.
GL: How ‘Keynian’ is the current mobile money set-up? Is there such a thing as culture in this respect? The sudden rise of thousands of boots, the informality of operators and the way in which they are rooted in families, clans and neighbourhoods seems to suggest that the technology remains very close to the existing social structures.
 There however is a place for bit coins as a niche addition to the eco-system to whom the technology and service adds value.
 Think about how complicated it will be to convince & educate legislators, let alone the common populace yet most of them do no know how to use computers and have cash as an alternative.
SM: Bitcoins are a complicated technology which needs to be explained to many other than technophiles.
 In theory, such a construction seems quite likely.
GL: I have heard geeks speculating about a possible implementation of bitcoins on future mobile money platforms.
 The Mobile Money agent is the friendly money outlet in my neighborhood, or wherever I go who is functional even when there is no power, and works all days of the week without fail, and whose language is very simple, “Who do you want to send to”, “How much do you want to withdraw”.
 So yes it is working, and given that culturally during burials, and ceremonies, I am expected to contribute I can do it conveniently.
Mobile money also has a social angle to it, from personal experience, I can honor my obligations to relatives in the countryside at way lower costs than traveling there or getting somebody else to do so.
 These are the regular people that you tend to transact with for small amounts, $10 to $50.
GL: If you think of mobile money, what do you think of? Boots in your area? Have you seen it at work in the countryside?SM: When I think of a mobile money outlet, I see a shopkeeper, a mother with her child in her booth, a wholesaler, a bar owner, a barber shop.
What the rhetoric does not state is that the unbankables also need the financial services, that have to be at a a lower price point to match their relative income which can be related to the issue of micro-payments in the commerce industry.
 The outlets are fully owned by the 3rd party agents which provides them with an alternate revenue stream while increasing their concentration and penetration.
Mobile money has relatively low transaction & convenience costs to move money from one person to another, works on feature phones, and outlets are limited by the business viability that increases when bundled with other business operations such as retail.
 However these unbankables used to exchange goods and services via barter trade without need for currency.
GL: Can you tell us more about the NGO ICT4D rhetoric of the ‘unbankables’ and how this is, or is not, related to the rise of mobile money?SM: There is truly a class of unbankables, who essentially live from hand-to-mouth in the new age cash economy.
 One should remember that telcos were formerly government owned monopolistic entities, so their structure is thus, slow moving but able to crush through the competition.
 The telcos are also consolidating, as seen in Uganda by the Airtel/Warid merger which was all about customers, to compete with MTN.
5% transaction fee shows a revenue of $10million with lower overhead costs has a higher gross profit margin than voice.
 On the other hand, the mobile money transfers in Uganda in 2013 were $640m, taking 1.
5 over the same period, even with 10 million customers, the gross revenue is $35million.
The penetration of mobile phones was also unprecedented as the costs of phones went down from $1000 in 1990 to under $25 in 2010, and ARPU from $1500 to $3.
 What the telcos have however is an existing mass of customers who are a captive audience, therefore by providing a good-enough service to those customers, they can reap economies of scale using existing airtime outlets and 3rd party agents.
 This is exacerbated by a huge drop in international call rates, through competition from VOIP services and improved technology, plus the rise and ploiferation of social media messaging applications that reduce the need for voice, SMS but gobble up data.
 The telcos on the other hand are fighting for their survival, in a world which is increasingly regulating them to dumb pipes on which the Internet is built.
 Why did they start with mobile money?SM: The NGO-sector and ICT4D rhetoric only appeared after the apparent success of mobile money, the banks have no interest in it because they have alternate revenue streams that have lower capital requirements and require less operational investment.
 Do we have to situate inside the telecom sector? From a 1990s internet perspective, these are conservative forces, to put it mildly, dominated by either large global players or (privatised) state firms.
 Needless to say, it is not coming from banks either.
GL: If I understood the origins well mobile money is not coming from the NGO-sector and its ICT for Development rhetoric.
That research exercise and experience helped validate my thinking in what does it take to move a payment system to the next level, despite the regulatory, competitive and economic constraints around it.
 Analysing the agricultural value chains which form 80% of GDP, found that the major constraints in improving efficiency was the difficulty in making and receiving payments.
 The baseline surveys showed that 85% of farmers have access to a phone within their households, yet their challenges were how to pay for inputs and get paid for their produce in addition to knowing what to plant and where to sell it.
 Later I worked with a non-profit which was seeking to bundle agricultural information with financial services via the mobile phone in Uganda, and mobile money as an existing platform looked viable.
When Mobile Money first started it was not very clear how it would work, and what benefits, which only became clear once I started using it regularly only then did I start hitting the boundaries of the available usage scenarios.
 A common pattern of problems always involved how to handle payments, without the overhead of cash or integration with banking systems to streamline information management.
 I have been a developer/software engineer in Uganda for the last 12 years focusing on custom web based solutions for clients across various sectors of finance, agriculture, eduction and government.
So I take this to be more than a report, it is a futurespective of what it would take for Mobile Money to move to the next level of usage, where it becomes a core platform for commerce.
 This is evidenced by people’s reactions when the systems are down or not functioning as expected.
 Can you tell something about your findings?SM: I have been very interested and watching mobile money from a distance both as a techie and a user – through a social lens of how it has transformed the lives of people in Uganda starting out as a nice to have to a necessary part of day-to-day life.
GL: You have written a report about mobile money in Uganda.
 In his latest engagement Musoke worked with an non-profit to build sustainable models in which farm and crop management tools and financial services are ‘bundled’ in affordable, unified platforms on mobile phone channels to promote commercially viable mass uptake.
 Stephan is a self-taught software engineer with experience in the design, development and delivery of custom software solutions to customers in government, finance and agriculture sectors (http://www.
 I am happy that he will present his insights at the MoneyLab event next week, here in Amsterdam.
I met Stephen Musoke in the office of the i-network, a Ugandan ICT for development NGO in Kampala where he told me about his mobile money research.
We look forward to seeing you there!
The MoneyLab Team.
 Come meet the people directly engaged with alternatives and get involved!• Speakers’ biographiesTickets are on sale here!Keep a close eye on the conference program, as there will be further additions to it in the following weeks (Bazaar participants, workshops, video projections).
 Each organization proposes a different type of exhibition, from books and flyers to visual installations and experiments.
 A number of organizations involved with alternative finance/currencies will be present throughout the day, expecting to meet visitors for acquaintance, discussion, exchange of ideas and advice during the breaks or sessions.
 The 6 topics of the conference are:Monetization of Everything // Dismantling Global Finance // Critical Art Practices // Mobile Money // Bitcoin and Beyond // Critique of Crowdfunding // Designing Alternatives• Details about the Alternatives Bazaar, a parallel but complementary event that runs on Saturday, March 22nd.
Dear MoneyLab followers,You can now have a look at the full conference program, which includes:• Sessions descriptions, speakers’ presentations (including details of the theater performance).
  He will join media theorists and activists Franco Berardi, Tiziana Terranova and cultural critic Brian Holmes in the session “Monetization and Dismantling Global Finance”.
Brett Scott is a speaker at MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives conference on March 21-22 in Amsterdam, Netherlands.
 Doing so is all about becoming aware of one’s potential in influencing mainstream finance.
 This is why he argues  for empirically experimenting alternative currencies and then pinning those experiences to intellectual theories.
 Yet while Bitcoin and crowdfunding are subject to overrated coverage, the others are shadowed.
Of course, the models and tools Brett Scott points out to are anything by neglected in media debate.
 The open source code of Bitcoin, for example, has led to several other crypto-currencies creating their own fan base and activity.
 The fifth is the ability to move from one alternative to another.
 This is what timebanks and local currencies depend on.
 The fourth is the ability to be part of a collaborative, yet DIY-minded network.
 Open data is an important factor of accountability; entities such as Charity Bank or initiatives like OpenCorporates adopt it to show where people’s investments are actually going.
The third is the ability to monitor.
 The second is access to common resource usage: crowdfunding and mobile money allow such access wherever a bank loan or payment providers refuses to.
 Thus the user is triggered into an active role.
 One who uses Bitcoins can join the network, mine the currency and help secure transactions in the decentralized environment.
 The first is access to means of production.
Counteracting these critical issues, Scott burrows 5 principles from open source technology and looks at how rising alternative revenue models are applying them to finance.
 The portrayal of an undecipherable complexity dominating the rules of economy further discourages individuals from understanding the inner dynamics.
 The current, private financial system, argues Scott,  is a monopolizing power that restricts access and promotes passivity, reducing the roles of individuals to that of consumers.
 trading machines and the looming threat to Wall Street”).
Today’s money however is largely printed by private, not state banks, and Scott analogically refers to modern armies as that  “of young men and women wearing suits and ties, carrying Oxbridge and Ivy League degrees, sent off to battle it out in the capital markets and trading floors of global investment banks, commercial banks and hedge funds” (a complementary story to this would be that of the witty, tech college dropouts moving to Wall Street and starting off the giant financial bots in Scott Patterson’s “The Dark Pools: The Rise of A.
 If anything, the historic roots of today’s money and financial system lie in the birth of state and was fueled by war – something which researcher David Graeber offers a complete anthropological account of, as does also Niall Ferguson’s history documentary “The ascent of money”.
 The history of this role has arguably never been in citizens’ hands anyway.
Brett argues for people (rather than big banks and payment service providers) engaging as financial innovators.
One of his recent contributions on the topic is an article addressing the question “Are we witnessing an open source finance revolution”? A term he coined himself, “open source finance” encompasses the wide range of initiatives in recent years that separate themselves from mainstream financial practices.
 He recently published his first book, The Heretic’s Guide to Global Finance, which accepts payments in Bitcoins, time notes, Brixton Pounds as well as bartering and collaboration proposals.
 He las a longstanding involvement with alternative revenue models, but also 2 years experience as a derivatives broker.
 Armed with curiosity to empirically engage with any complex systems of interest before delving into theories, Scott defines himself as an economic explorer and financial activist.
 He has an academic background in social and economic research and works as a consultant in alternative finance models, both within the Finance Innovation Lab in London as well as independently.
Brett Scott is a strong advocate of a participatory culture that would question and redesign current financial systems.
 Then, be sure to book your ticket for the conference.
 Check out the conference program, sessions descriptions and speakers.
net) and team.
The MoneyLab program booklet has arrived, proudly conceived by our designers (VosBrenner.
 Can performing arts or other visual arts find similar models?.
In the coming year, it will be more and more interesting to observe the rise of investment crowdfunding for the arts.
 If you want to read more about his motivations and plans for Passion First, here’s an interview with him in Tribeca.
 Its initiator – Richard Guay – is an independent film producer for almost 30 years.
The platform will be open to the audience later this year.
 The financial target of a campaign cannot exceed 1 million $ which makes the platform fit for funding short productions or partly cover the costs of features.
 Also, given the amplitude of the platform and current regulations, invested funds will be handle with a third-party such as a bank.
 In this sense, it’s perhaps less experimental and more tuned towards the traditional financing model; film ideas and scripts furthermore get vetted before reaching investors.
 While accredited and nonaccredited investors can participate, the outspoken goal of the platform is to attract the former.
 Unlike existing platforms of its category, it targets experienced film and documentary makers and connects them to investors, not donators.
What’s particular about it?It’s the first crowdfunding platform designed after the 2012 newly-voted regulation JOBS Act (Jumpstart Our Business Startup Act) in the US.
A particularly interesting one is Passion First Funding Portal, addressing the film industry.
While the long-established Kickstarter recently reached a record-breaking 1 billion $ in pledges, new crowdfunding platforms are just launching.
More details on the event page.
 The audience can thus participate in the  Science Slam or the Utopia Exchange Stock (a trade game developed by artist collective Invisible Playgrounds) and engage with financial mechanisms in an interactive way.
Intertwined with discussion sessions are exhibition tours and performances, as the conference itself is part of the larger New Industries Festival (which runs until 26th of January this year).
The conference proposes an examination of the origins and historic build-ups of our current crisis-prone system, the process and consequences of de-industrialization, as well as a charting and critique of technological novelties the likes of  Bitcoins or the automated trade based on algorithms.
This is the case with the New Industries Conference: Money and  Debt in the Post-Industrial World , a four-day event (January 16-19 2014) organized by the HMKV (Hartware MedienKunstVerein)  in Dortmund, Germany.
A growing number of inquiries are being made worldwide into the deeper roots of the financial crisis, as well as the the implications of technological developments in financial mechanisms for both the creative industry and society at large.
 She concludes that simply “some things are too important to be left to the business models”.
 Therefore, she calls the audience not to dismiss all the things and rights we have worked to gain for centuries, but also to avoid making the same mistakes: “when the Internet emerged, the market was supposed to be free but the outcomes emerged that do not make it free at all” she reminds.
 Swartz highlights that there are some aspects that liberal democracy and state are effective at, even in the time of the sharing economy, like “enforcing the rights of the underprivileged” while privatization creates the areas for potential discrimination.
Then, to show the other side of the story, she points to the Diners Club, the pioneering credit card system that in 40’ and 50’ granted black Americans the memberships – although there was no way of assuring those members would not be refused (by white Americans) the services they wanted to pay for with the card for some made up reasons.
 Currently, mentioned Swartz, PayPal is using public software infrastructure owned by the government to make the transfers of its clients – hence, it is a private company using public rails, much like Google’s buses.
 Swartz points here to the main gatekeepers of the venture capital in the Silicon Valley, such as PayPal, whose co-funders are interested in building independent nations on oceans; their administration would be subject to internal laws, but this hints towards the bigger, more state-like initiatives that corporations have.
 The mix of communitarian and libertarianism  – when encountered by today’s Silicon Valley actors in the payments field – was often subject to “sloping off the communitarian aspect and maintaining only the libertarian side”.
 She advises that attention and action need to be taken when building new systems, as well as looking closely into “alternative economic practices” and the innovations in the money space that are being funded by Venture Capitalists.
 The “tension between what we used to call public and private” is “at the heart of what we really need to think about here” argues Swartz and she aims to provide not only the topic for an academic discussion, but mostly a design challenge.
 “It’s a good life – for some” concludes Swartz; for others, those services become a target of “a tremendous activism or a kind of anti-Silicon Valley-activism”, as in the example of the San Francisco Google buses transporting Google workers, but using public stops and causing delays of the public buses.
 Techs get a free transport; they make use of Airbnb and other sharing services and platforms and reputation points.
 Despite the abundant criticism in response to it, there were voices supporting this declaration, one of them even stating that “techs live freely, opulently, and with no need of money”.
 One of them was posted by the employee “tremendously active in the Occupy Wall Street movement in the US” that suggests Google is capable of running the government better than the people responsible for it at the time, especially in terms of providing better workers treatment.
 Swartz presents tweets posted by Google employees that encapsulate that attitude.
Techs avant-gardeIt seems that techs from Silicon Valley in San Francisco are making the most out of this lifestyle; they see themselves as an avant-garde for these new services of exchange.
 What would be profitable for us, states Swartz, is a “central hub” of exchange where we would be able to swap our valuable skills or the trust currency that we build up within the community for something that we can’t create ourselves.
 As we have been aware of the online identity and history on the web influencing online trust, we are somewhat familiar with a notion of “a trust currency”.
 “In the end, money may be just one of many ways to measure and exchange flows of value, and financial institutions may similarly be just one of many channels for that flow”.
 There has been a general disruption caused by the rise of the Internet with its information transparency and the disruption of the global banking industry caused by new players and platforms in the money system.
Times of Disruption and a Trust CurrencySwartz then loops back into the theme of the innovation in the money space at which point she introduces “disruption” as another crucial term for consideration.
 It is clear that the three of the above-described factors make the money sector more and more attractive, also today.
 It is like “America took an ecstasy one night and then woke up with no serotonin left” provokes Swartz, claiming that despite the downside effect people do want to feel the rush again, they want to believe it is possible.
 “They had this rush of hope and belief and optimism, which was then instantly dashed”.
 For many figures in Silicon Valley the 2008 was the first time that politics came to play as a possibility of making a difference.
 Global financial crisis on the other hand “undermined our sense of legitimacy of and trust in the global economy”.
 iPhone covers all of it and M-Pesa “demonstrates it in action”.
 What these four had in common is that they “animated the imagination for what money could be” in terms of “medium of exchange” or “store value”.
 Firstly, The iPhone era – undermined by the “powerful computers” carried around in the pockets, then the M-Pesa mobile payment system – “one of the earliest and most successful ones”, followed by global financial crisis and the election of president Barack Obama.
 America on EcstasyIn a manner of associating national ethos with certain time periods, she looks for explanation while taking us back to “2008-ish”, naming that year’s four interesting trends in the United States.
 What she noticed instead was a coexistence of certain optimism, vision and idealism in 2011 alongside necrocapitalism – quite a contradiction that inspired Swartz to conduct further research aimed at gaining an understanding of that phenomenon.
 At that time, she had “one foot in feminist economics” and “the other in social media and cultural consequences and critique of the network society”, and was amused to discover that these areas weren’t considered as integrated by the attendees of the event.
 While participants were organizations working with alternative currency, sharing economies and such, all speakers were start-ups or marketing gurus from the Silicon Valley, an aspect Swartz found very interesting.
Optimistic NecrocapitalismLana Swartz stepped into the money field in 2011, at an event sponsored by parties involved with a “traditional alternative economic practice” debating the future of money and how to better organize it.
’ The take-away is that the overall benefit of this technology outweighs the risks associated with the status quo.
 For example, dependency on telecommunications companies and other forms of what some see as ‘neo-colonial control.
 Beyond the technological risks, there are also social implications, which Lynch discovered through his anthropological approach to studying these technologies.
 Similar to the security issues surrounding more mainstream forms of e-payment, including hacking and infrastructure issues, mobile money also has its inherent risks.
On the flip side of this, mobile money also generates its own problems.
 Similarly, mobile money quickly cut out the often rampant corruption in money transfers, where previously ranking officers and bank officials took a cut of the payment.
 Mobile money is a solution to this problem in that it provides rapid movement of funds in a generally secure electronic method.
 This form of remittance transfer also carries its own costs, often adding hundreds of dollars to the overall price.
 This leads to problems such as theft or long delays in the transfer.
 How do they manage to send a part of the money they earn back to their families, when only 10% of them are registered bank users and banking agencies are sparsely located? Before developments like mobile money, typically money was sent back via a trusted third party (always a human agent), such as fishermen who would carry money from one part of Haiti to another.
 Haitian people often leave their small villages and migrate to larger cities to secure work there.
 He brought up the example of remittances.
Through this approach, Lynch began to investigate how mobile money was both a problem seeking a solution and a solution seeking a problem.
It is this symbiosis between the human and technological way of offering financial security that has lead Lynch to take an anthropological approach to studying how mobile money influences the social systems in which they are deployed.
 Similarly to this, people expect high security when it comes to their virtual money.
 This is not too different from people generally keeping their wallets safe and close by at all times.
 He used the example of Haitian women merchants who hide large amounts of money in undergarments or other concealed locations, yet also keep a small amount easily visible in the event they are robbed on their way back from the market.
Lynch began by describing how obscurity is commonly used to provide security for cash transactions throughout the world.
 He discussed security as one such major issue.
The self-described ‘reformed tech geek’ Gawain Lynch built on his experience in information security and asset protection in order to discuss some of the issues currently surrounding the growing field of mobile money.
source: iamexpat.
 Henk van Arkel from the Social Trade Organisation in Utrecht claims that alternative currencies come and go, running from between one and four years on average, but that this is influenced by the unemployment rate and financial situation of the medium.
 These local currencies create an additional market and encourage cooperation within the community, and while the Dutch Central Bank doest not consider them legal tender, they are regulated and taxed by the Belastingdienst, which requires payment records.
 With less money, but more time on their hands, people can exchange services and expertise or find additional customers with other currencies.
Many things can be said about such alternative currencies but most of them are a consequence to the financial crisis and economic backdrop.
 Both have come into use in 2013 and circulate along with the euro.
 Rotterdam also has two local currencies, the first being the zuiderling, used in the south of the city, while the other is called the dam, used throughout Rotterdam.
 Groningen has the gulden, Gelder has the gelre, Achterhoeke has the achthoeker and Leiden has the zonnemunt.
 Other cities in The Netherlands have created their own money as well.
In The Netherlands, since last year, Amsterdam has a currency called makkie, which now joins the older currency called noppes.
 The sardex is the one of Sardinia, the Wir is Switzerland’s and Ithaca Hours are used in New York.
  In Belgium, the torekes is the alternative currency of Ghent.
 In the United Kingdom, London has the Brixton pound.
Apart from the worldwide bitcoin success, local currencies are gaining more and more momentum.
Just at the end of last year, the Dutch government was alerting people against trusting alternative currencies such as bitcoin, citing their highly volatile exchange rates and no accountable issuing institution.
 While Kickstarter does a good job at being open about its statistics, many platforms choose to disclose only some, if any, stats and inner-mechanisms.
 What determines, for example, the campaign reaching the initial and critical 10-20% of funds? Given that other studies show how the final big amounts are raised in the last days of the campaign, can we assume there is pattern in how and when funders donate? How could know-how in this improve the efforts and tactics crowdfunders approach? How much time investment, on average, does a campaign require? What percentage of funders actually come from the immediate social networks of those crowdfunding and how are strangers approached?Further research into crowdfundung dynamics, as needed as it is, also depends on availability of data.
Nevertheless, it also opens up space for new questions.
 By looking directly into data and mechanisms, it arguably offers much more useful information the usual crowdfunding guides or “tips and tricks” offered by the crowdfunding platform themselves.
Other findings in the dynamics of crowdfunding include that:This research is valuable for anyone considering to crowdfund as it tests some of the previously assumed factors that influence success.
 This is something the author correlates with the crowd’s perception that worthy projects should reach target quickly as a validation of their value.
Does a longer time frame for raising money improve chances of success? Contrary to the initial assumption, findings suggest that longer duration decreases chances of success.
Do big goal size projects stand less chances of success when compared to smaller budget projects? Increasing goal size is negatively associated with success – this is the case when comparing budgets over $5,000.
 Mollick explains this by the increasing trust level that Kickstarter offers those project by choosing to support them.
Does being featured on Kicstarter’s homepage increase chances of success? An unfeatured project stands a 30% chance of success when compared to a featured project which stands a 89% chance of success.
 Furthermore, he noticed that there is a cultural determinant involved as well: certain areas with strong history in either the film industry (LA), music (Nashville) or technology (San Francisco) increase the success chance of crowdfunding projects that fall in the same category.
Does the geographic location of the project bear any relevance on its success? Mollick points out that projects stand a higher chance of success if the creative industry in their location is also well developed.
 Findings: projects with no video have a 15% chance of success, those incorporating videos are 37% likely to succeed.
Can we discuss levels of “quality” in regards to projects? What are indicators of quality and does the crowd judge on them? The author looked into how well prepared the campaign pitches were and took the presence or absence of a video as the main indicator for quality.
 Social capital plays an important role.
 This confirms the intuition that the use of one’s social media network increases the money raised – the more friends, the better.
Some of  the tackled questions reveal the following findings:Does the size of the campaigners’ social network affect the success of their campaign? Findings suggest that a network of merely 10 Facebook friends gives the campaign a 9% chance of succeeding, while a network of 100 friends takes that to a 20% chance and one of 1000 friends takes it to 40% .
In this context, Ethan Mollick’s The Dynamics of Crowdfunding: An Exploratory Study  (2012) tries to answer one of the most heated questions circulating around this alternative finance model – what are the determinants of success and failure in crowdfunding and how do they inter-relate? The paper uses the database of Kickstarter (roughly 46,000 projects,  half successfully completed, half failed) to probe certain factors believed to play an important role in the process of raising money.
 This is a serious draw back, as many potential crowdfunders would benefit greatly from valuable insights in crowdfunding mechanisms.
 What exactly these are and how much weight they each have in the fate of a campaign has largely gone undocumented, as academic inquiries have only recently begun.
 On top of that, there are also particular contexts and factors that can enhance or limit the campaign’s potential to succeed.
 Why?Those who have crowdfunded know that to successfully raise the set amount of money is a goal requiring effort, time, some training and expertise.
 Yet more than half of projects submitted on Kickstarter, one of the most prominent crowdfunding platforms, fail (Kickstarter stats).
With popular crowdfunding platforms reporting millions of euros raised in just one year’s time, crowdfunding success might seem to come easy.

[2] E-mail interview with Vasily Zaitsev, December 2013.
US | *MON3Y as an ERRROR:/ Rhizome, July 31, 2013.
[1] Call for Artworks: MON3Y.
 Although the project is completed, artworks are still accepted.
”[2]Shame 2013, Miron Tee 
The online exhibition had its opening on 23rd September 2013, at http://www.
In the light of emerging alternative money experiments, does Vasily believe in alternative currencies, such as Bitcoin?Vasily: “The only alternative is a currency that establishes a limit towards the accumulation of capital, that doesn’t allow speculation, and that can be used as a tool for social wealth.
 BE CAREFUL”According to Vasily, this sentence is an essential part of the project because it shows the fatal and ironic paradox of a critique that takes place within Web 2.
us info page states: “*ONLY FACEBOOK, YOUTUBE, VIMEO & FLICKR MAKE REAL MONEY WITH ALL THIS.
 “[2]ʞooqǝɔɐɟ dollars, Systaime Of course, it’s ironic that Facebook is indirectly making profit of the exhibited content.
 That is why, rather than “making friends” it is more desirable “making art” as long as the action contains a critical approach towards the web 2.
 Is it becoming more an artistic place and less of a social space?   Vasily: “Unfortunately, Facebook is the commercialization of social relationships.
0 €uro, Lars HulstSome may declare Facebook ‘dead and buried‘, but it can also be considered as an increasingly lively place for artistic exploration, with pseudonyms and endless collections of art.
 These additional artworks can be found outside of Facebook too, right here.
 About 200 artworks in various formats were submitted to the Facebook event page throughout the summer of 2013.
 The call for the exhibition welcoming  ‘unlimited submissions’, was framed as a self-proclaimed “Happening 2.
 Around 70 international artists were selected by the anonymous curator Vasily Zaitsev, calling himself after a famous Russian sniper of World War II, a man who ‘acted from afar’.
”[1]This text sets the tone for the exhibition, which despite of the reference to Glitch is not limited to Glitch artworks.
THE SYSTEM IS MONEY, AND APPLIES TO ALL
HUMAN ORGANIZATIONS OF NATURE.
THE MONEY IS A Gl_tch.
 NOT ALWAYS IT HAPPENS (sic)The term is common particularly in the computing
and electronics industries, and in circuit bending,
as well as among players of video games.

It is often used to describe a transient fault
that corrects itself, and is therefore difficult
to troubleshoot.
“A Gl_tch is a FAULT in a SYSTEM.
 The call for artworks, circulated in May 2013, and was described as an extended call for ‘ Gl_tch/ERRROR’.
Art , New Media, Interactive Art, Multimedia, JavaScript, Glitch, Video, Online Performance, Animated GIF, and Digital Image.
M0N3Y AS AN 3RROR showcases a wide variety of works by both renown and lesser known artists, working in fields such as Digital Art, Net.
Art & Digital Art.
net: an independent initiative, founded and directed by Bernardo Villar, for the promotion and support of Net.
US“ is an online exhibition on the subject of Money & Error, organized and produced by M0US310n.
“M0N3Y AS AN 3RRROR | MON3Y.
do in bringing changes with P2P funded deeds await do-ers’ participation, whether anonymous or not.
 The influence of Peer.
do is set to launch in May 2014.
do’s P2P system: one to many (like the Kickstarter), some to some (competition amongst do-ers for a fund created by other do-ers), and some to many (competition amongst do-ers for a fund from different parties).
 King envisions three dynamics of Peer.
do, do-ers can create a deed with a message, image, and URL that presents their cause, along with three modes of measurement: “earnings”, “credibility”, and “longevity”.
; as King points out, “anonymity powers different action”.
 Many deeds can gain more power and support if the do-ers can avoid possible consequences of publicly funding deeds, such as supporting Edward Snowden’s return to the U.
do is an engagement and action platform that funds “deeds”, such as projects on investigative journalism, and also allows supporters, or “do-ers”, to anonymously fund deeds.
do, which aims to bring forth P2P actions that can greatly impact the world online and offline.
Since then, King has built up momentum to showcase the power of P2P infrastructure with Peer.
 The film interviewed members of the Pirate Bay and further opened up discussions on the influence of P2P networks.
King is better known as a filmmaker who created and released the film “Steal This Film” on BitTorrent in 2007 with the League of Noble Peers.
do – a laboratory for co-funded action” that aims to support movements of all shapes and size, for “Kickstarter can’t fund a protest”.
 Jamie King’s presented “Peer.
Haiven maintains a Tumblr collection of artworks that utilize these approaches which, in addition to his other work, provokes further questioning of our relationship with money, and of money’s role in our relationships with one another.
 He suggested several methods that artists employ to these ends, including repurposing art’s perceived prestige, as in the work of Barbara Kruger, or creating objects explicitly designed for purchase by the elite, such as Damien Hirst’s recent projects.
Finally, Haiven listed examples of artworks that use the medium itself to highlight art’s complicity in the economic system.
 2008) by Michael Najjar, which visualizes the rise and fall of the stock market through manipulated photographs of Argentinian mountain peaks.
 He illustrated this point with the work nasdaq 80-09 (c.
Haiven then discussed how the aesthetic qualities of money open up possibilities for its reimagining by confronting viewers with the tensions between money and art’s values in contemporary culture.
 He also gestured to the myriad tools that have emerged to quantify art’s value, such as ArtRank, a site that attempts to advise investors on which artists to buy or liquidate.
Taking stock of the present state of the art market, Haiven called attention to major art institutions adopting financiers for their boards, and artists adapting their work to meet market demands.
” He addressed these “arts” in three sections, first surveying the current status of art’s commodification, then moving to an examination of the aesthetics of money, and finally reviewing artworks that activate money’s relationship to the medium.
A component of the Reimagining Money project is an investigation of what Haiven has dubbed the “dark arts of finance.
 Marx viewed the Commune’s merely symbolic gesture as a missed opportunity to make concrete material interventions, and Haiven urged those conference attendees working to reimagine currencies to avoid making the same mistake.
 When the Paris Commune tore down the Place Vendome Column commemorating Napoleon I, its members chose not to tear down the Bank of France, anticipating that they would later require its resources.
Haiven warned, however, against a purely utopian view of alternative currencies, using Marx’s criticism of the Paris Commune as a cautionary tale.
 In his MoneyLab talk, Haiven posited that alternative currencies add facets to that imagination by providing avenues for reshaping our social structures, and for working outside the boundaries of state power.
 Initiated by Max Haiven, Assistant Professor in Art History and Critical Studies at the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, the project positions money as “a medium of the imagination,” a means of collectively visualizing our network of social relations.
 The Reimagining Money project explores the aesthetic and cultural aspects of money through research and presentation of a variety of media.
Coming soon with a full conference of its own on March 21-22, Amsterdam!.
MoneyLab traveled at the transmediale Festival, Berlin.
 Citing the Panama example, she highlighted how these funds managed to aggressively reposition the state by buying their debt, and forcing them to pay it back it with interest.
Amongst other issues, Sassen also touched upon financial innovations such as credit, which she better phrased as debt or the “little bridge that helps finance invade just about any sector”, and linked it to the infamous vulture funds that “extract value from little pickings”.
 In contrast, if we could govern finance, we would be able to build housing for the world, or green energy transport systems for everything.
 These institutions hold a monopoly over money creation; nevertheless, Sassen claims that “finance has lost the capacity to govern itself” and keeps fluctuating between different crises whilst continuing to develop instruments of its own accord.
 Furthermore, this financialization then invades other sectors, the ones that actually produce goods and services, since finance itself simply “does not have what it needs to produce”.
 The current system of financial institutions, she argued, revolves around creativity that sells what it does not have through inventive instruments.
Sassen also distinguished between traditional banking (the selling of money one has or money one can instantly borrow), and finance (the selling of something one does not have).
 What exists is the capability of financial actors and instruments to allow these calculations to act as if they were real.
 For example, the global GDP, estimates Sassen, is around 60 trillion dollars; however, she carefully notes, this money simply does not exist.
 This is especially true, she claimed, when you look at some of its current forms such as global GDP and outstanding derivatives.
 Her interesting talk highlighted that money, material or non-material, has never really existed.
 Rather, finance is a capability (understood here as a variable whose valence can change radically).
 For Sassen, finance has, ironically, enabled the monetization of everything and cannot be simply reduced to money, because then you miss “the key aspect of the plot”.
 She opened the session by stating that “it is a mistake to think that finance is about money, that if it only were, it would be so simple”.
 Sassen is a long time friend of Geert Lovink and famous for coining the term “global city”.
Saskia Sassen joined speakers Stefan and Ralph Heidenreich and Bill Maurer in the first panel of the MoneyLab conference – “Monetization of Everything”.
 DuPont has written a series of publications on the topic, including:.
This is the reason why cryptography in general, as well as its particular role in Bitcoin, is becoming of increasing importance to research from the perspective of politics.
 Now, when cryptography has transcended notation and has become what DuPont calls a “mathematical magic sauce”, this power has shifted from an individual holding a key to a string of machine actions containing it.
Historically, cryptography has always played a role of power and control – ever since the practice was purely alphabetical and notational, the parties who had access to the cryptographic key had control over the encrypted message.
 And as one of the foundational features of Bitcoin, cryptography carries over these properties over to the digital currency and its role in our “control society”, says DuPont.
 This heavy political charge is reinforced by Julian Assange and Edward Snowden publicly promoting “ubiquitous cryptography” as the only way to protect citizens from the surveillance state.
Cryptography is loaded with politics, DuPont believes, “politics of liberation, freedom, community, all with an explicitly anarchist tone”.
In his talk titled “From Order To Control: How Cryptography Functions in Bitcoin”, researcher Quinn DuPont discussed Bitcoin as a case study for cryptography.
 Thus, how Bitcoin is distributed needs careful planning, centered on long-term sustainability rather than its purchasing power as a novel model of currency.
 A healthy economy depends on the inter-reliant nature of a society that has many layers of decentralized decision-making.
 Weber points out that discussions on monetary reform can be misleading, for it is not the unit of currency that should be scrutinized, but how it would circulate to support a functioning economy.
 Trust issues aside, the basic principle of how money travels to create an economy has to be better strategized.
Bitcoin is a “speculative asset” because it is not tied to standardized unit of account or currency, like the American Dollar.
 The Duckburg citizens contribute to the flow of currency to make use of new income sources and this brings resilience to deflation with moderate tolerance for inflation.
 Uncle Scrooge views his funds to be increasing in value the longer he stores it with limited transactions, which can often result in deflation.
 Duckburg citizens invest their money and work with third parties to circulate or invest their funds.
 Uncle Scrooge hoards his money and does not trust third parties to handle his transactions.
 Weber demonstrated his point with two archetype characters, Uncle Scrooge and the citizens of Duckburg.
Currently, Bitcoin favors those who hoard versus those who participate in circulation of its currency.
 The value of Bitcoin is thus in flux depending on the user-base growth.
 For example, when the number of new users of Bitcoin increase, the value of Bitcoin increases.
 Weber’s succinct answer was: Bitcoin can never become legitimate, for it is “unstable by design”.
Beat Weber’s presentation, “Overcoming the Legitimacy Crisis of Money with Bitcoin?” illustrated concerns over whether or not Bitcoin could support functioning economies.
 Conclusively, building a sustainable distribution structure remains a challenge.
 Crowdfunding should not be replacement of public funding, for the vox populi does not fund with impartiality, and neither do traditional studios or broadcasters.
 The public funding for the arts is still necessary to provide a support platform for emerging talent.
“Crowdfunding enforces established hegemonies”, Sørensen argued, for it still operates within traditional production and distribution channels to promote films.
 Furthermore, another issues is that crowdfunding takes time away from a filmmaker’s creative process, and instead redirects focus to marketing in order to get funders to realize a project.
 The awards and attention gained through festivals contribute to a film’s long-term success in reaching the public.
Filmmakers are dependent on festival circuits that are largely controlled by distributors and broadcasters.
 Yet, Sørensen’s research showed that the main beneficiaries were actually the broadcasters and distributors of the crowdfunded films, not the filmmakers.
 Moreover, filmmakers can retain ownership of their work rather than hand it over to a distributor.
 The audience in turn gets to have a more personal involvement in films that they care about.
 A commonly noted benefit of crowdfunding is that filmmakers can go straight to the interested audience without relying on major studios.
 These films heavily promoted crowdfunding as a new means of financing and distributing productions.
There has been an influx of crowdfunded films that have garnered much attention, such as “The Age of Stupid” and “Inocente”.
 She began her presentation “Peer to Peer or Mine to Mine? – A Critique of Crowdfunding” by making it clear that crowdfunding supports established names rather than newcomers in this creative industry.
 She has a particular interest in how crowdfunding changes the landscape of documentary film production and distribution in the U.
Inge Ejbye Sørensen is a researcher in digital economy and culture at University of Glasgow and also a documentary filmmaker herself.
 Pulling in the audience as stakeholders, she encouraged conference attendees to invest in the next chapter of her story, the stock of which can be purchased on her website.
 Her most concrete advice was for audience members to occasionally check-in and ask themselves: “What is it that I really desire?”This MoneyLab performance represented a portion of Dette Glashouwer’s continuous research into the complexities of money.
 This realization led Glashouwer to develop a variety of self-help strategies towards the improvement of money relationships, including an analogy to food, implying that people should enjoy money in the same manner, understanding when enough is enough.
 She divulged that her relationship to money bears resemblance to her romantic relationships, in that fear and hurt feelings lead her to attempt to reject money altogether.
 She shared her personal fears of money, including concerns that there is not enough of it, that she is not worth it, and that she must negotiate for it.
 In the concluding movement to her piece, Glashouwer addressed the emotional side of money by invoking the “spirit of desire,” the innate human drive that always wants more.
 She hung the shirt on a line above her, where it stayed for the remainder of the performance, along with the aforementioned spice hanger and later-used props, forming a minimal but effective set.
 She amusingly illustrated this figure by uncovering a collared white shirt of the type frequently worn by business professionals, embroidered with a graph depicting the happiness-to-income ratio.
 Glashouwer then proceeded to talk about money in more contemporary terms, explaining that earnings of 58,000 euro per year represent the tipping point at which happiness begins to decline.
 This lack of availability inspired the Dutch to sail the oceans in search of the spice and to form the first multinational, the Dutch East India Company, pioneering an early form of shareholding, which ultimately led to the stock market.
 The imported spice had apparently been used to treat stomachaches, but its trade was abruptly discontinued during the Dutch-Portuguese War.
Revealing a mobile-like object consisting of a wire hanger and dangling spice packets, which she dubbed an “installation”, Glashouwer described the most expensive of these spices, white pepper.
In a sort of pantomime timed perfectly to music, Glashouwer donned a costume resembling the central figure in Rembrandt’s The Night Watch, and noted that it referenced 1602, when the Dutch developed a revolutionary financial system as a result of various ailments of the period, for which spices became remedies.
 Glashouwer mused about her fascination with money throughout, dramatizing past events, such as how goldsmithing led to banking when a goldsmith started to write checks that he did not have enough gold to cash.
The piece engaged viewers in a crash course on the history of economics, investigating debt, stocks, pay bonuses, and more along the way.
 A Dutch actress and performance artist, as well as one of the founders of Dutch theatre troupe Suver Nuver, Glashouwer has toured this and related solo performances around the world.
“Money has never interested me,” repeated Dette Glashouwer during her performance titled MoneyMoneyMoney, opening the third session of the MoneyLab conference.
Please forward the survey link to others who crowdfunded or might be interested in the topic!
Your time and help are much appreciated!.
 Should you encounter a technical problem, please write and mention  the browser you are using and attach a screenshot of the issue.
Survey is compatible with Internet Explorer (7+), Firefox (4+), Safari (3+), Chrome (2+) and Mozilla.
If you have further questions, please contact irina@networkcultures.
 Therefore, please be honest and as accurate as possible.
 Results are quantified and integrated into a data visualization that will help inform future campaigners about what the process of crowdfunding involves, before they start.
This survey is part of a larger research project on crowdfunding, within the MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives project.
 It is not relevant whether the crowdfunding campaign was successful or not, nor whether it was non profit or for profit.
com/SE/?SID=SV_23lxjoHHmnEWn09The survey takes 10-15 minutes, has 14 questions and is anonymous.
Are you one? Then kindly give us your valuable input by filling out this survey:https://qtrial.
We are looking for people / collectives that have used crowdfunding to finance their projects, initiatives, businesses etc.
All in all, for those who are interested in Bitcoin, along with the promise of financial freedom and security, this could be a good read to get deeper into the subject and understand its potential.
 It would also be good to keep in mind that the views expressed in the book are often quite subjective concerning crypto-currencies and their relation to governments.
 Another downsize is the poor quality of the images throughout the book and the sloppy editing and printing process, which makes the book’s quality feel poor.
To people already familiar with Bitcoin, this book might seem a bit outdated at times, as it was published in May 2013, therefore some information is not valid anymore.
 It leaves no stone unturned and it thoroughly explains the terminology and future prospects of Bitcoin.
 The authors touch up on the subjects of digital currencies history, advantages and disadvantages of bitcoin, its volatility, steps to getting your first bitcoin, spending, saving and investing in them, but also mention the crash in April 2013.
 This is a quick read which will only take about a couple of hours, but which at the same time contains essential information.
Even though the subject is quite complex, the authors manage to explain in a straightforward, concise, and often enthusiastic manner about the revolutionary currency.
 The authors go through several crucial matters which are explained in a familiar way to people who have had some sort of experience with economy and trading, but even a complete novice would still gain a lot of knowledge from the book, due to the fact that regular life situations are presented as a context.
‘Bitcoin Explained – Today’s Complete Guide to Tomorrow’s Currency’ is a quick and easy way to get started on some basic information about what Bitcoin is and how it works.
Look forward to see some of the students on the 21st and 22nd of March at MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives conference, where these topics are substantially covered.
Finally, an introduction in mobile money was made by Jeroen Verplanke, lecturer on Ge-Information Science and Earth Observation at the University of Twente.
 He is currently completing his thesis on Bitcoin, more specifically on how to use interactive media to build a website with quality information on different crypto-currencies, for the use of traders and journalists (his work here).
 Mike is a student in Communication, Multimedia and Design at the University of Applied Sciences Amsterdam.
The lecture also included a presentation on Bitcoin by Mike van Rossum.
 They are currently studying research methods and applying them to the topic of alternative revenue models.
In a short break from organizing the MoneyLab conference (that’s up next month!)…
… we’re introducing new students to crowdfunding!This presentation was held for the 1st year students in Communication, Multimedia and Design at the University of Applied Sciences, Amsterdam.
”Above all, it’s casual money which reminds us that money, rather than something universal, should be considered like language: just one way among others to enable relationships, something that everyone should be able to use and that isn’t owned by any.
“The vision is of a fully decentralized money network for friends, communities and movements.
 “It is designed to encourage the flow of gifts rather than market-based transactions” and enables community building.
PunkMoney, as a decentralized, peer-to-peer currency, has no unit of account.
 By listing to the #PunkMoney hashtag, it can list most current transactions.
 He can easily do so by tweeting the following, making Alice the new recipient of Sally’s promise:“@Sally transfer @Alice #PunkMoney”                                                                        -@BobFurther visionTo develop his concept, Gothill also worked on a tracker, an open source tool that anyone can deploy to a live server.
But let’s admit that, for some reason, our Bob here doesn’t want to get a drink with Sally and would rather transfer his credit to someone else.
 Easy! Bob, after he has finished his beer, just has to favorite Sally’s tweet to acknowledge that redemption.
: “in one week”)-One can indicate that the promise is “NT” (non-transferable)Once a promise has been kept, it has to be redeemed by the recipient.
But besides those basic rules, PunkMoney can also use other optional ones:-One can specify an expiry date (i.
“@Bob, I promise to buy you a beer #PunkMoney”                                                                        -@SallyWhy is Twitter so well-suited? It provides a unique identifier as well as a precise timestamp.
Live demonstrationAs his live demonstration shows, his idea is actually quite simple: by making their promises public, people feel more obliged to fulfill them.
Thanks to its simple set of protocols and gestures that can be used by anyone, nobody specifically owns PunkMoney.
Click here to watch Eli Gothill on PunkMoney at Digital Money Forum 2012 from PaymentsGeek on Vimeo.
 Basic rulesGothill explains:“#PunkMoney is a promise currency anyone can create, transfer and redeem on Twitter”As credit at its origins, it is based on an honor system and relies on trust rather than coercion, as current state money does.
 Though the use of a social network so often associated with Silicon Valley neoliberalism could appear odd, it’s Twitter’s transparency that made it the perfect platform for Gothill’s experiment.
”Building on these reflections, Gothill wondered if one could create money on a media as ubiquitous as Twitter.
 Then, if you broke your promises, your reputation would become so bad that this prevented you from cheating.
“It was first of all a contract between two persons who trusted one another.
 Above all, it relied on one’s honor and reputation.
 Back then, credit mostly constituted of paper promises issued by merchants to one another.
 As he later explains, the origins of credit money can be found in the history of Muslim Trade Routes.
More than anything, his reflection focused on one specific kind of money: credit money.
 Above anything, money was based on a relation of trust”.
 It is only later, in China, that paper was introduced.
 From premodern China and Muslim Trade Routes to Twitter“In the early ages, people were using anything they could find to create money.
His project occurred to him after he started questioning:“Can people create their own money? Do they only have to rely on centralized money to exchange?”Based on this thought process, he decided to conduct an experiment about how anyone, from a Twitter account, could be able to create money.
 His motivation, he admits, was first of all a political one.
Gothill, a young software developer and a blogger on the future of money, started his experiment in October 2011, a short time after the beginning of the Occupy protests.
At the crossroad between social media activism and performance art comes Eli Gothill and his project #PunkMoney.
 These would be relevant insights in order to see what the long term perspectives of ‘social coins’ are, what novelties it can bring in a world where aspects such as social capital or behavior have long been measured by (largely) proprietary platforms.
 What would be very interesting to see is a visual map with how the coins travel, as well as an explanation of how impact is measured (which metrics are used?).
However, since I don’t have a ‘social coin’ yet, I cannot have access to the online system and see how tracking, metrics and measuring impact actually works.
 As ‘social coins’ are tracked and supposedly measure the social good impact they have, they make a fit tool for companies to integrate in their social responsibility program.
 In the same “Why?” section of the websites, companies are encouraged to mint coins (essentially, demand and purchase them) and then either give them to employees or to NGOs/schools.
I rather see a concrete purpose when it comes to corporate involvement.
 The purpose which ‘social coins’ then serve is to amplify one’s common sense of helping others by incentivizing direct response.
 This moral indebtedness is acknowledged, made real with the reward of a ‘social coin’; it does not suffice to say a passive “thank you” but rather activate one’s behaviour to give back (or in this case, pay it forward).
 What helping others creates is a form of moral indebtedness.
 Altruism though is a debatable concept.
 However, while browsing the website, I kept wondering what purpose do ‘social coins’ really help serve and what are the long-term perspectives here?In the “Why?” section of the website, individuals are encouraged to engage with the ‘social coin’ as a means to be altruistic and eco-friendly.
I personally like the idea of tracking the acts of helping others (and geo-mapping and visualizing how these coins travel would surely be interesting to observe), as well as measuring impact (which is not fully explained at the moment).
 There is some flawed English here and then ( which makes texts hard to follow at times), and a few inconsistencies (for example, Social Coin is sometimes defined as a for profit, other times as non-profit).
The website of Social Coin offers further useful information, albeit it’s clearly in its initial phases of design and content.
 The Social Coin also presented their success at the European Commission conference on crowdfunding, in June 2013 (see video below).
 Judging by their statistics, the movement has taken scale.
 but also called for and identified companies and travelers to do beta-testing.
 They reached an amount of 10,000 E.
What’s interesting about The Social Coin is that its founders crowdfunded for the idea in early 2013 on Goteo – a Spanish crowdfunding and crowdsourcing platform.
 On the other hand, companies could purchase any number of coins and either use them internally for employers or donate them directly to charities and schools as part of their corporate social responsibility program.
 The third opportunity would be to offered one from an owner, which is more by chance than by choice.
 They could also choose to volunteer for charities that have been donated social coins and receive one from them.
 Those interested can offer a small donation to the non profit behind the idea and get two coins made: one for them and the other for a charity.
Here are some interesting statistics available so far:
There are a few ways to earn a ‘social coin’.
 After 10 pay-it-forwards, the coin should be buried in the ground as it contains a small rose seed.
 When the next owner receives the coin, scans the QR codes and logs in with the unique code in the online system, the ‘social coin’ is tracked on a digital map to see how far away from the initial place it has traveled and what the measured impact is.
 The rule is always to award the coin to someone they helped (‘help’ is broadly defined- it can mean a simple gesture or investing considerable time and knowledge).
 Once there, the owner writes down when and how they plan to give the coin forward.
 When scanned, one takes the owner to the Social Coin website and the other provides the unique code that can be logged in the online system.
 It holds a different QR code on each side (printed on a small piece of paper).
So how does it work?
A ‘social coin’ is made of biodegradable and compostable polymer.
 Alongside with the coin, they need to explain how it works and request that the new owner makes an act of kindness to someone else and thus passes on the ‘social coin’.
 It is essentially a physical coin; the owner gives it to a person they have helped (whether friend or stranger).
Social Coin is the initiative of a Barcelona-based non profit.
 It goes even further than that – the coin is encoded, which makes it easy to track and visualize how far it has travelled in the process of good-doing.
It seems like the “pay it forward” idea just got monetized by the new currency development entitled Social Coin.
 Crowdfunding workshop for advanced: 16:00-17:00 If you haven’t had the chance to get your tickets for the conference yet, you can do it here! The program includes several sessions, an alternative bazaar, art and performances, and of course, workshops.
 Crowdfunding workshop for beginners: 14:00-15:004.
 Crowdfunding workshop for advanced: 11:15-12:153.
 Crowdfunding workshop for beginners: 09:30-10:302.
 Seats are limited so be sure to book early!The workshops will be happening in a different room during the sessions in the main room, and are scheduled for Friday, the 21st of March, the first day of the conference, as followed:1.
org with your name and the preferred workshop and time.
 Workshops are available both for beginners and advanced!If you have purchased tickets for the conference, you are invited to sign up at rsvp@networkcultures.
 Are you interested in crowdfunding and want to learn more about it so that you can apply the knowledge to your project? Then sign up for a crowdfunding workshop at the MoneyLab conference! Karim Maarek from teach2fish will be teaching you how to create a crowdfunding project and ultimately how to pitch it.
Possible topics may include but are not limited to:• Finance, art and philosophy
• Theology of finance
• Education and neoliberalization
• Street finance
• Finance and ethics
• Financial imaginaries
• Finance and society
• Finance on film
• Gambling, finance and risk
• Finance and visualization
• Over-indebtedness
• Finance and subjectivity
• Boundaries of finance
• Sustainable finance
• Finance and value
• City branding and liquid cities.
nl) before May 1, 2014.
se) and Joyce Goggin (j.
Please submit an abstract (no more than 500 words) to Thomas Bay (bay@fek.
 We also invite papers that approach finance through avenues that have been underexplored such as theology, philosophy, art, music, film, new media and television, to give just a few examples.
 We are, therefore, calling for contributions that take into account the relationship of the critic to finance and to discourses on finance, including received values, moral codes, authoritarian knowledge, political correctness, academic manners, common sense, good will, opinion and implicit presuppositions.
 While finance is clearly a societal domain ridden with crisis, our sense of critique embraces the possibility of risky confrontations with the external powers that drive finance, as well as with internal, ethical combats that impact on the critic’s own situation within academic discourses on finance.
Although critical attention is regularly devoted to finance, it generally takes the form of a call for transparency, or the systemic repair and restructuring of a paradigm in need of a shift.
 This year we are again looking for contributions to our ongoing collaborative research project that seeks to engage finance in critically creative ways.
Call for papersThe sixth Critical Finance Studies conference will be hosted by the Amsterdam School for Cultural Analysis (ASCA), and held at the University of Amsterdam from August 13–15, 2014.
On their website you can have a look at the campaign mechanism and a few examples of submitted campaigns.
 Eligible campaigns can be for individuals as well as non-profit, organizations and companies.
 Indiegogo decided to celebrate it between March 3-8, by contributing $1 for every $25 raised for every campaign that empowers girls and women.
The 8th of March is the International Women’s day and a national holiday in 35 countries, dating as far back as 1911.
 Come to see a live band playing, The Sonic Mondays!Facebook event.
Join us for a party right after the conference ends, on the 22nd of March! We’ll be at De Nieuwe Anita, for the Amsterdam BeatClub event.
 While alternative currencies are addressing this issue already by allowing people to create their own wealth and mobility (from Bitcoin to crowdfunding), Holmes suggests that a direct action against austerity measures is needed in order to fix the mainstream finance as well.
 It is these debts and the precarious working contracts that heavily burden people and their economical power.
 He stated that money comes in three forms: unlimited money (the one endlessly printed by banks, the speculative one – stocks, bonds and other trading packages), the Fordist-type of money (the one people relate to – monthly salaries, benefits, taxes that go into schooling, arts or public infrastructure) and finally flexible money (in the form of flexible wages that cause debts that one is mandated to pay back).
Holmes ended the speech with an important remark.
 Another result is that “billions of dollars have been bought at ultra low interests rate in the West and in Japan and ploughed into government bonds in the developing South (Mexico, Brazil etc)”, together with big investments that further create social and economical inequalities and conflicts in those areas.
 Turning to the second question – what are the results of having bailout the banks and the corporations they support – Holmes draws attention to how unemployment grew and salaries were stagnant throughout this period, which meant more money could be poured in for-profit purposes.
 With money becoming electronic, it becomes harder to keep track of who and what gets financed.
 What these companies do today, explained Holmes, is finance themselves ahead of production, endlessly expanding operations and then quickly creating corporate bonds to trade and get even more money.
 With many corporations and medium sized businesses getting themselves financed all the time, no credit is enough.
 While this was supposed to help economies grow, it did the opposite.
 Money keeps being leant over and over again, with total created credit growing 50 times since then 1945 (from 1 to 50 trillion dollars).
 While in 1945, banks were regulated so as to keep 20% of any deposit as a reserve, today they are required to keep a mere 3% and, often, nothing at all.
 Laws made it easier to do this.
 He explained how the money that people place in banks is not deposited there – fractional reserve banking essentially means only a small fraction stays in the bank, the rest is circulated to other accounts.
 We all owe banks the money that they never had, he argued, which makes bankers appear as mystical creatures, offering us what they themselves do not posses.
 Holmes continued discussing the notion of “creditism” that is supported by fiat currency.
 Fiat currency, mused Holmes, essentially means “let there be money”.
 The amount of printed dollars available in 1968 was 44 billion, whereas in 2007 it was 930 billion (a 20-fold increase).
Much of this invented and spontaneous wealth went to “guns and butter”, namely the welfare state and the Vietnam War during President Johnson’s mandate.
 The Federal Reserve could now print money in whatever quantities it wished and called it fiat currency.
 After this, the dollar’s new value was claimed to be derived from “productivity”.
 Around that time, however, the Federal Reserve of the United States decoupled the value of the dollar from the gold reserve.
 banks could only issue as much printed money as they could back by real gold reserves.
 Yet where did the bailout money come from and what were the consequences of pouring it all in the “sinking ships of global finance”? Holmes traced the first question back to 1968, when the U.
 The phenomenon, explained Holmes, was evident in the 2008 – 2011 financial crisis, where these states used all their money to bail out banks.
, European Union, Japan, and other industrialized economies.
 This money creation is often a tool used by the U.
 The second, and more striking, is outright monetary creation.
 The first is ultra low interest rates, often below the level of inflation, that allow people to “rent money” effortlessly, thus creating debt.
He focused on two elements that contribute to this state of affairs.
Holmes began his speech by stating that the time of ‘supermoney’ is now, explaining how power, control, and wealth can be acquired and used by the push of a button, with money being created, in many instances, out of thin air.
 Recently, he has been looking at issues surrounding global supply chains and their effects on society.
Brian Holmes has long been a key voice in the critical and activist oriented discussions on economics and is especially active on the Nettime mailing lists.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/1_Slater-MatthewDesigningAlternatives_Crypto_matslats.
pdf http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/3_Gothill_Eli.
pdf http://networkcultures.
lana_swartz.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/4.
 Designing Alternativeshttp://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/4_MoneyLab-Crowdfunding-Toolkit_Irina-and-Robert.
pdf http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/4.
pdf http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/1_Sorensen_Inge.
 Critique of Crowdfundinghttp://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/4_DuPont_Quinn.
pdf http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/3_Weber_Beat.
pdf http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/2_Surda-Amsterdam-2014-03-22.
pdf http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/1_De_Jong_Eduard.
 The Bitcoin Debatehttp://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/2_Taylor_Erin_.
pdf http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/1_GawainLynch.
 Mobile Moneyhttp://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/2_Peperkamp_Ron.
pdf http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/3_Daniel_Rozenberg.
 Critical Art Practices:http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/2_Brett_Scott.
 Dismantling Global Finance:http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/2_Heidenreich_StefanRalph.
pdf http://networkcultures.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/1_Sassen_Saskia.
 Monetization of Everything:http://networkcultures.
 Stay tuned for the full videos which are coming up next week!1.
In case you missed our conference or some parts of it and you want to catch up with what our speakers talked about, here you can find most of their presentations.
by
Nick Meehan’s website: www.
The Lobby website: www.
 The legal aspect is the biggest hurdle for the time being.
 The specialties required at the next step of the project are help from lawyers, lobbyists and front / back / web developers.
 For now, it’s all about getting enough interest – I have already been contacted by researchers, developers and social entrepreneurs (US and NL) who want to discuss about it.
What challenges do you see for ‘The Lobby’ next? At this stage, ‘The Lobby’ is an idea.
 Second, because it is an alternative revenue source for them, one that is a little more “democratic”.
 First, because it is an opportunity to represent the public interest, not just the private one.
 And so far they would be interested to get involved in such a project.
Have you pitched the idea to actual lobbyists? Would they get involved in it?Yes, I have reached out to a few in order to have their input on whether this model is viable, how the process could be monitored and regulated etc.
 It’s like a carrot and stick policy: “If the government does this, we’re going to give you money for a campaign”.
 When there is a campaign that serves those causes, money can be automatically released to selected politicians.
 The website would set up a fund for specific causes.
 Yet it could be easier to make ‘The Lobby’ website function as a lobbyist itself, with no go-between anymore.
 For now, communicating this project as a crowdfunding for lobbying is the easiest way to make people understand the purpose.
 In any case, it should be an open platform where lobbyists would bid and pitch themselves for a specific job and then people could choose the most suited lobbyist for their cause.
 In terms of functionality, there are different extents to which people can be engaged – perhaps they can rate lobbyists based on their performance.
 Who supervises the work of the hired lobbyists? How and by whom is action coordinated?)I have investigated intensely on how to answer these details but cannot provide definitive answers.
Apart from raising the funds, how will ‘The Lobby’ be managed? (i.
 Similar instances like the SOPA bill could be efficiently addressed by ‘The Lobby’.
 Hence the role of a lobbyist to better explain the implications of voting for it, as well as organizing public outreach.
 In any case, crowdfunding and lobbying worked in that case partially because congressman did not fully understand what the bill was about.
 I believe they also hired a lobbyists for the cause.
 A group of protesters set up a website to raise funds and used them for targeted advertising campaigns.
 For them it was beneficial to send a lobbyist and talk to congressmen and pass this bill, while the people against it needed to raise their own money to lobby for the opposite cause.
 Production companies were the initiators of the bill because they wanted to control content and copyrights.
 Take the example of the SOPA bill.
 It is not entirely new to use crowdfunding for political causes.
Can ‘The Lobby’ be a tool for any cause?For some it can.
 Its aim is to democratize this whole process.
 Thus, the idea of ‘The Lobby’ is to look at key issues and raise money for them, thus leveling the field of interests.
 In that scenario, what people could do with a tool like ‘The Lobby’ is raise money to counteract the money that comes from gun companies (in US, that is the NRA).
 One example is gun control policy which was the example I used in the video.
 As a result, there’s currently legislation being passed that is clearly disconnected from what’s the best interest for most of the country.
 At the same time, there’s a tremendous amount of money that goes into lobbying for corporations and for the wealthiest few people of the country.
 There’s a disproportionately small number of lobbyists who represent the general interest of the public.
How does The Lobby change the traditional lobbying model then? What issues of the latter does it tackle?Lobbying right now is not being done by small associations.
 This move would also be organized by a lobbyist.
 In an extreme case, the dog owners’ association would hold the fundraiser for this politician that they’re trying to influence for re-election or create a Pac.
 On a darker side of lobbying, there can also be fundraisers for politicians that are meant to influence them in a direction of voting.
 Lobbyists further influence these decision makers towards a favorable outcome for the dog owners’ association.
 federal government) to be able to build them, etc.
 The Lobbyist knows the right people in the local government and is able to talk to them about why dog parks are important, where the money could come from (i.
 One way to make the legislation pass and get the money to build the dog parks is that a dog owners’ association hires a lobbyist.
 I’ll just take the example I use in the online mockup, where a group of people decide they need more dog parks in a city.
How does lobbying normally work?Lobbyists are hired by a lobbying firm and can be contacted by any interest group.
 Many times, lobbyists are former lawyers or workers in a Senate office and even former senators and congressmen.
 They can be incredibly influential, not only in the US but also in Europe.
 All in all, the lobbyist’s job is to understand the laws and know who to talk to.
 It is the lobbyists’ role to influence them towards a particular legislative outcome.
 Lobbyists are very well informed about which senator and congressmen can be approached with a specific request or cause.
 Their requests or causes can reach politicians in the form of bills.
 Constituencies can also be a wide range of associations that represent the civil interests.
 Constituents are not always big corporations, albeit lobbying is often perceived as evil because of this association.
 Lobbyists’ role is thus to write, interpret and inform decision makers of these bills from different points, typically from their constituents’ perspectives.
 The problem is that there are more bills being proposed and laws passed than one can be fully aware of, and most of the people who are in government don’t have time to learn about them.
 They choose to pass or reject proposed bills.
 Politicians are decision makers.
 In this sense, lobbyists should act as intermediaries between private and public interests and their elected representatives.
 Lobbying itself might have been inspired by the United States Constitution, First Amendment: The right to petition government for redress of grievances.
What role does a lobbyist play in politics?I will speak primarily from my knowledge of the US model.
 In a broader sense, you can see it as a tool for crowdfunding politics.
 In a nutshell, ‘The Lobby’ is, at this stage, a tool for crowdfunding a lobbyist for legal purposes.
What is the project ‘The Lobby’ about?Nick: ‘The Lobby’ is one of my two thesis projects.
 He just graduated from the Eindhoven Design Academy, BA program ‘Man and Communication’.
 He was born in Los Angeles, US and moved to the Netherlands 4 and ½ years ago to study here.
Nick Meehan is a digital designer.
 This idea raises quick interest and further inquiries, which is why I proposed an interview to the project’s initiator.
 His recent project ‘The Lobby’ is about using the crowdfunding model for democratizing politics and the process of lobbying.
 Digital designer Nick Meehan takes a new direction with it.
Crowdfunding is typically employed to raise money for products, services or arts/culture initiatives.
org/moneylab/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2014/03/Twitter-Search-MoneyLab.
http://networkcultures.
 Here is what people have tweeted while they were attending the MoneyLab sessions.
The Twitter #moneylab feed was quite busy during the past weekend.
 With a significant interest in communities it allows certain “protectionism”, limiting ownership by restricting access to account creation (as he explained during the discussion panel afterwards) and assuring fixed exchange rates.
Finally, he moves on to the project of Ethereum, which according to him resembles the next generation and the idea behind it is that ordinary people will have a chance to buy and sell virtual commodities and execute credit contracts with lawyers.
 The other is “harder to redeem” and “requires trust” on both parties.
 The first one is backed up by gold in the bank and if you want to buy something you have to get the money (cash) first.
“Bubble gum is yours because you paid for it”In his presentation Slater also discussed the difference between commodity money (controlled by wealth) and credit money.
 “A little deflation isn’t too bad if you hold money for a long term”, but if you plan to exchange and it’s an equal value “we can just say it’s the same” even if the currency as such is different.
Later, Slater asked the audience to take a step back and reconsider classic functions of money, such as the store value (something that “shouldn’t go down to zero all of a sudden”), the medium of exchange and the measure of value.
 All these aspects need to be taken into account and so need the issues of governance, law, tax and privacy.
 What follows in the process is a need of a suitable payment infrastructure – cryptos cannot be used in a shop, outdoor settings, or as Matthew puts it, “in a real situation”; instead, “you have to go back to your PC”.
Cryptocurrencies: Designing AlternativesWhen designing community’s cryptocurrency, one should decide who and what it is for and whether it’s “the best tool to serve the purpose”.
 However, the main point of his critique was that as much as effective PR is crucial to the currency implementation process, it cannot make up for the lack of substance in the designed product – and that applies to crypto currencies as much as to anything else.
 Scotcoin a crypto currency that belongs in the category of national/regional cryptos, is another ”great idea”, and so is Aurora, “because you can actually do it on a national scheme”.
 What truly formulates their success? “A good PR behind them”.
As successful crypto currencies, Slater listed Bitcoin – the “most used” – and Dogecoin – an innovative “currency of appreciation”.
 The number of coins, block time or “release rate”, mining difficulty and hashing algorithms are discussed as underlying principles of the crypto currency design.
 Here he stressed how important design and its parameters are in finding answers and, because cryptos are “more of a phenomenon” than a product, those parameters are created accordingly.
 Therefore, he looks into alternatives and factors that constitute their success.
 He first explained the term crypto currency as “a block chain or simply a chain of blocks” and stated that a cryptographic chain makes manipulating points very expensive, as new messages are appended to the old ones, so changing one element means recalculating the entire chain from that point onwards.
 As co-founder of Swiss NGO Community Forge and a community currency consultant, he helps host around 80 communities’ web sites, from donations only.
 Slater has been building an open-source mutual credit system for five years now.
 Matthew Slater, a software activist from the UK, introduced the prototype of an online platform implementing the crypto currency payment method.
The late afternoon session on Saturday was dedicated to the theme of “Designing Alternatives”.
 A truly scalable model would be an open one, in which the payment issuer makes the connection between the customer and the company, the customer exchanging value and the company offering back service, with all security needs met.
 The majority of the systems will fail in practice, with notable exceptions in the case of public transit.
As a conclusion, we see that electronic currencies have been here for over 40 years and they are here to last.
Looking at Bitcoin, we see that it is a decentralized, closed e-currency model, where trust in authority is replaced with trust in computation.
 The closed system will have the company and the e-currency issuer as part of the same organization:Whereas in an open system, we see the issuer and the company as being two very separate entities.
E-currency is spendable as well as redeemableDe Jong goes on to describe two systems – the open and the closed one.
 This varies from system to system; evolution, in that respect, brings with it a competitive advantage.
 This is what De Jong calls “the redemption period” – a phase in which the value has been transferred but the customer cannot access it yet.
 Cycle wise, the transfer of value onto a device requires a processing period.
A typical visualization of an e-currency system will have these attributes:The classical currency will, thus, be used in the transaction between the payer and the e-currency issuer as well as between the e-currency issuer and the merchant, with goods and services being transferred between payer and merchant.
 It can also be mixed, meaning that the value is stored on a secure device and each transaction is also recorded onto a database.
 De Jong went through some interesting examples such as:The e-currency model may vary from “cash” – when the value is stored on a secure device – to “bank” – the value is recorded onto a database (a “ledger”).
 The value is transferable and the electrons are on a wire, in silicon, in a magnet.
 First of all, he explained, it is important to understand what we mean when we say “electronic currency”: electrons that represent monetary value.
Eduard de Jong started the session on Saturday with a brief history of digital currencies.
com/album/2799328/video/90733981.
 – http://vimeo.
com/album/2799328/video/90733980Timebank CC.
com/album/2799328/video/90733979Teach2fish –  http://vimeo.
com/album/2799328/video/90733925Share NL –  http://vimeo.
com/album/2799328/video/90733692Qoin –  http://vimeo.
com/album/2799328/video/90733691Noppes –  http://vimeo.
com/album/2799328/video/90733690Next Nature Network –  http://vimeo.
 Videos of all Bazaar pitches:Geheimagentur / Theatre of Research – http://vimeo.
 The Bitcoin ATM was available at the conference, making it easy for anyone to acquire Bitcoins.
 The ATM works in three steps: putting the bank notes in, scanning a QR code with your phone and finally receiving confirmation of the Bitcoins transferred to your account.
Two students that would like to help popularize the use of Bitcoin and make it more accessible for everyone built the Bitcoin ATM.
cc platform is used by a few thousand users in the Netherlands and Portugal for putting people in contact on topics as diverse as 3d modeling, tax return and preparing traditional food.
 In Europe the Timebank.
 Timebank volunteers donate hours of their time to help others and get the hours back by also tapping into the community and using the skills and services that it offers.
 It soon evolved into a much broader array of skills and services at a global level, where time is the only currency.
cc started in The Hague as an experiment in skills and services exchange between artists.
 He gains Noppes that he can then use to get help for finishing his master thesis through another member of the Noppes community.
 She then turns to a student for help.
 A possible scenario of a Noppes exchange is: an older lady is looking for help in learning how to use a computer program.
 It works according to the zero principle – people start gaining currency as they help others.
Noppes started 20 years ago in Amsterdam and has connected a large number of people from very diverse backgrounds around sharing objects and services.
 To the ever growing (over 5000) social networks around the world, we can also add the over 800 B2B networks of retail bartering that comprise 400 000 businesses and bring over 50 billion dollars in annual revenue.
 For businesses this means, among others, saving, working capital and new customers.
 Qoin believes that community currencies can bring about a more resilient market for SMEs and a stronger regional economy.
 Currently they are consulting projects such as the Bristol Pound, Brixton Pound, Makkie, TradeQoin and WeHelpen to achieve social and environmental goals as well as financial sustainability.
Qoin supports a variety of businesses and institutions in setting up community currencies worldwide.
 It is then not a coincidence that TIME has called sharing “one of the 10 ideas that will change the world”.
 This shows a high level of trust within the community that is waiting to be explored by sharing economy projects.
 Another 24% would lend their car to a stranger.
 In a similar question about trust in strangers, 35% of people said they would like to teach a new language to a stranger, while 52% of respondents would like to learn a new language from a stranger.
nl shows that 52% of Amsterdammers would borrow their tools or bicycle to strangers while 50% would use them.
In fact, a study conducted by Share.
 Rachel Botsman and her talk on TED about the sharing economy inspired co-founders Harmen van Sprang and Pieter van de Glind in starting this project:“Entire communities and cities are using technologies to do more with less by renting, lending, swapping, bartering, gifting & sharing products on a scale never before possible”.
nl also offers consulting to companies that would like to effectively use the sharing economy.
 They inform individuals of the many ways this can be done: sharing transport, accommodation, objects and skills, to name just a few.
nl explores the 3S (social, sustainable and saving money) to bring the sharing economy to a new level.
 Among the projects that Teah2Fish has made possible are the Impact Maker’s Fund by Impact HUB Amsterdam (a fund especially created to support social entrepreneurs in starting their businesses), Starters4Communities (who offer practical training work in neighborhoods) and Ortus, an innovative board game.
 The startup does this by helping its clients understand their “WHY” part of the project, and teaches them how to tell their story better, unleash the power of the crowd and last but not least, achieve their dream.
Teach2Fish offers consultancy to any entrepreneur or artist who wants to successfully crowdfund.
 This is a very organic alternative to our current forms of currency, as the farmer would normally need to cut down the rainforest entirely in order to cultivate crops and earn a living.
 A possible scenario would be: a local farmer takes care of the rainforest and gains ECO coins that he can use for living costs.
The Next Nature Network proposes a new currency (the ECO currency) that will bring doing good for the planet and the financial system in harmony.
 A network of local shops offers services and goods that can be purchased with the currency.
 Schoolchildren invent a currency for themselves, create a design and a name.
 The Children’s Bank of Hamburg is conceived as a participatory children’s theater in collaboration with Theater of Research.
 Shops offer certain services and products that can be paid with Kohle.
 The Black Bank offers Kohle coins to people, who in turn provide services for the local community of Oberhausen.
 Their goal for the future is to establish a trans-European real democracy movement by organizing a General Assembly in December 2014.
Geheimagentur is now supported by local authorities in building The Black Bank of Oberhausen and The Children’s Bank, networks that complement the official payment systems.
 It is behind successful community currencies such as Timebank, Brixton pound and LETS, to name a few.
 NEF is a think-tank based in the UK that promotes social, economic and environmental justice.
 Banco Palmas is a solution for rural poverty that ensures micro-credits to local entrepreneurs with low interest rates and no registration requirements or guarantors, except from a neighbour confirming the borrower’s reliability.
Inspired by community initiatives such as Banco Palmas in Brazil and New Economics Foundation (NEF), Geheimagentur began their journey into an economy of gift.
 The switch was from burning money to inventing it.
 Later on, the project developed into a solution for impoverished communities in Germany.
The Alternatives Bazaar on stage made its debut with Geheimagentur, a project from Germany that started out as a protest against the conventional banking system and as an art installation (“the bank of burning money”).
 Instead, we want to replace a system of scarcity with one of needs and solutions.
 To this he replied that, with digital currencies, this is exactly what we want to get rid of: enforcement.
Ownership over the means of value transfers is problematic:Maurer ended his presentation with some questions as food for thought regarding the future of currency:During the Q&A session, Maurer was asked about what he makes of the classical “money as enforcement” paradigm.
 Will we look at money as advertising/marketing tools? Will we have a decentralized ledger? There is a battle about to happen over who controls that ledger.
The future of money is a hot topic right now.
Reputation based currencies are another interesting example (see Klout score) – in that case, using your online and/or offline popularity could gain you rewards.
 Some other examples: American Express issues private tokens and the newly popular Bitcoin sees the “token” and the “rail” converge; gift and prepaid cards don’t require a bank account in order to be activated.
 M-Pesa allows users with a national ID card or passport to deposit, withdraw, and transfer money through their mobile phone.
 M-Pesa in Kenya is currently the most developed mobile payment system in the world and a very useful micro-financing tool for a developing country.
 The “PayPal” system rides the “rails” of payment.
The 20th century sees a large number of new payment systems arising around the world.
The founder of Bank America/Visa would afterwards say about the invention of the credit card system: “We were in the business of the exchange of monetary value, not in the credit card business”.
In terms of digital currencies, the Diner’s Club emerged in the 50′s as one of the first independent credit card companies in the world, producing credit cards for travelling and entertainment purposes.
 Non-par banking also occurred at that time – the practice of charging fees to execute a draft or check drawn from another bank.
Wildcat banking in the 19th century’s United States is, perhaps, similar to what we see in the alternative currency systems today: the actual regulations of banking varied from state to state.
 Terms such as “freight” and “token” start to be used about the same time as the habit of cashing in checks arises.
Looking a bit at the origin of alternative currencies, we see the 19th century’s references to the railroad systems.
 Of course, a lot of the emerging payment systems fail along the way.
Bill Maurer began his session with a statement about the alternative currencies today: “It’s a wild west out there”.
 Above all, we must keep dreaming.
It reminds us that in the very complex world we live in and at a time where new technologies represent serious threats as well as inspiring hopes, we must remain idealistic, keep coming up with new solutions.
Dadara’s speech, compared to the down-to-earth talks of scholars, finance experts and entrepreneurs, appeared rather utopian, sometimes poetically naïve.
 “Money felt like a gift,” says Dadara, who has used such platforms to enable some of his new creations.
Therefore, the question of how to finance his work has probably often come to his mind, and the artist reckons he is quite enthusiastic when it comes to crowdfunding, which he sees as a kind of anarchism.
  This performance, he admits, financially ruined him for two years.
 In 2002, with his project named the “Fools Ark”, he sent a ship he had crafted from the Netherlands to the US, so it could be burned there, again at Burning Man’s festival.
The joys of crowdfunding: “money felt like a gift”As most artists, however, Dadara’s relationship with money has sometimes been more practical.
 The artist also had a proper lawyer write down a contract for him, therefore legally stating that he, Dadara, is the entitled owner of his time.
As Dadara amusingly says:To better emphasize his point, the Dutch performer wants to organize minutes of silence dedicated to wasted time, so people could contemplate how much of this resource they have lost.
 To remind us that time is one of the most precious values on this planet, his bank now aims to issue time notes.
 One minute of silence… for all the time we wastePerhaps reminding us of another well-known proverb, another of Dadara’s projects targets the value of time.
”Fun fact: drawing on money is considered a federal offense in the United States, and can legally result in a fine or up to six months imprisonment, or both.
As he also writes on his blog:“Our current form of currency has turned from a neutral medium of exchange into a belief system.
”By destroying money’s financial value, Dadara made it appear for what it truly is: pieces of printed paper rather than something inherently magical.
“Money doesn’t grow on trees,” they sayAnother project of his is the Transformoney Tree, in which Dadara asked participants to glue dollar bills on the branches of a tree he had crafted and, if it pleased them, to paint and “make them pretty.
 While performing at Envision festival in Costa Rica, he realized that when he used his own banknotes, people would come up to him and start asking questions.
One of the aims of Dadara’s currency is to create dialogue, to encourage people to share stories while using the artist’s bills.
 In his opinion, money has made most social exchanges so dramatically anonymous that we should try to add love to our payments as much as possible.
 Why do we not appreciate spiritual or social value more? Why such a competitive drive?”To illustrate his point, Dadara’s Exchanghibition Bank issues its own money: starting with zero and infinite bank notes, he then printed love bank notes.
 Every value becomes a number.
“Money quantifies everything.
 The weeklong utopia’s inhabitants, therefore, were already quite receptive to a reflection on money.
More recently, Dadara performed at the Burning Man Festival, a choice that could seem odd at first, but is actually rather logical: the festival takes place each year in Nevada and relies only on a gift economy.
Gift economy meets love banknotesHis installation was first exhibited at several cultural spots such as the Rijksmuseum and the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam, before moving to more public spaces like Amsterdam Central Station.
It is furthermore after realizing that “there wasn’t much money for art but a lot of money in banks,” that he decided to include money and banking in his art.
 And to do so, he did something quite surprising given his anti-money perspective: he created his very own monetary institution, the Exchanghibition Bank.
” From 2010, Dadara found his new ambition: to make people think about money.
“Most people, even though they use money every day, don’t think about it.
 It is only when he started reflecting on the value and monetization of art that the topic of money caught his attention, gradually taking a predominant role in his recent work.
“Art was the only thing I cared about,” he says.
 Dadara claims he had no interest in money whatsoever until three years ago, but that he is now fascinated by it.
 From underground culture promoter to bank directorThe Amsterdam-based performance artist started his career as an illustrator, designing flyers and recording covers for the electronic house scene.
Among the heteroclite crowd of scholars, artists, entrepreneurs and journalists intervening at MoneyLab comes Dadara, a man that could seem quite like a UFO after the finance-oriented morning of talks and conferences.
 Every time there is a problem with something, people want to regulate it by putting someone in charge.
Concluding his presentation, Peter Šurda gives his answer to another popular question associated Bitcoin – “Should it be governed?”: “This is not an issue specific to money or Bitcoin.
 And finally, Šurda states there is no reason to believe that there is ground for class division between privileged and unprivileged in a decentralized monetary system, even if early adopters are believed to hold an advantage.
 Secondly, Šurda explains that unlike popular belief, Bitcoin is not manufactured “out of thin air” and randomly priced, but is, similarly to any other commodity, adjusted to the costs of its production.
 This means that the myth of “no chargebacks” is merely a product of poorly designed contracts with untrustworthy parties.
Firstly, Šurda reminds that, despite media hysterically spreading stories of irrevocably lost Bitcoins, the currency exchange allows for practically any contractual agreement.
 He believes that Bitcoin is an example of such a paradigm; however, Bitcoin is plagued by several popular misconceptions that Šurda  set out to dispel.
Šurda points out that a potential solution for these inequalities is a decentralized monetary system that allows for a more efficient, more secure money exchange that anyone can gain access to and thus become a part of the global financial system.
 Šurda notes that there are even further restrictions to members of emerging markets, underage or oppressed individuals, and people with low credit rating or a police record.
 Meanwhile the unprivileged, unless they decide to engage in counterfeiting money or operating a bank without a license, are restricted to simply play along with the rules set by the ruling class.
The privileged, or the institutions in charge of money production, control economic activity and are immune to prosecution.
 unprivileged class” structure.
 The barriers set for people to entry the money creation and circulation in a centralized banking system, in combination with discretionary monetary policy, lead to a segmented society that Šurda labels as the “privileged vs.
 decentralized structure of society”.
Economist Peter Šurda made a case against a hierarchical monetary system in his talk “Why is Bitcoin misunderstood: hierarchical vs.
 (read more).
In the plenary debate that followed, representatives of the  media production company Submarine Channel, the online distribution network VODO and the open source software company Blender detailed their own finance and distribution models.
 We should be open for more examples on how people manage and share networks in a productive way so others can build on these experiences and start to create their own.
 This translates best as a form of marketing or recognition in the public domain of your product.
Trust turns out to be of central importance.
 A film, for instance, needs a lot of pre-finance, and is therefore very different from a music album or dance performance, and relates in different ways to a crowd or network of people.
 Participants agreed that the use of networks or network economies alone could not be seen as a general strategy to get a project up and running.
 How are interactions shaped between participants in the production and circulation of free culture? What kind of transactions take place there? And who benefits?At the table artists, creative entrepreneurs, media experts and researchers discussed the possibility of organizing networks to finance the making of cultural and artistic projects.
A round table report by Robert Van BoeschotenOn Friday 29th of November at the Nieuwe Instituut in Rotterdam a diverse group of people came together to discuss the hidden transaction systems of free culture.
Can Bitcoin support a global reach, economically speaking?Is Bitcoin for everyone? Is it relevant if people understand how it works? How difficult is Bitcoin to understand, outside of a tech savvy community currently surrounding it?I have rounded up several cons that are widely adopted by media narratives – follow the next post!.
 What is the case with Bitcoin’s legitimacy, given its independent and disruptive networks?Is faith in algorithms’ security and neutrality justified? Then what is there to do about the hacking threats?What role is Bitcoin currently playing – commodity or medium of exchange? Price instability and the currency’s deflationary nature pose a big question mark next to its so called self-stabilizing nature.
Money derives its legitimacy from the state.
 It is the latter’s often conflicting purposes and implications that can make most of the arguments reveal their cons side.
All in all, arguments used in favor of Bitcoin rely heavily on the crypto-currency’s nature and characteristics.
 This is probably the least studied side of Bitcoin and simultaneously a very relevant one for the currency’s wider adoption.
 “Bitcoin creates money without creating debt, it stores money for free, it’s faster, cheaper and available for everyone” says Nicolas Mendoza of Al Jazeera.
 Bitcoin does not create debtPerhaps the critique to which Bitcoin responds directly is the heavy debt that exists in current power structures of finance.
While Bitcoins seems to have been built to become what Salmon calls the lingua franca of the Internet, it is this very argument that, if proven true in the years to come, can also be the currency’s weakest points.
 Bitcoin is a global currency“With Bitcoins, transfers can take place across continents and time zones with no problems, no time lags, and only minuscule transaction fees,” Salmon Felix of Reuters argues.
 Since the algorithm of the Bitcoin software is set to release only a number of Bitcoins every 10 minutes (50 for the first four years of existence, and then reducing to half every other 4 years), this means that, unlike the state, it can only issue a limited amount in total: 21 million in 20 years, with no inflation (Liam Halligan of Telegraph UK).
 Bitcoin is a self-stabilizing currencyThe argument here lies in Bitcoin’s self-regulating mining algorithms.
 Over the last year, the number of newly-designed Bitcoin ATMs has grown, including this Dutch case.
 (Credit: Declan McCullagh/CNET).
Zach Harvey and Matt Whitlock, creators of the ATM that accepts dollar bills and instantly converts them to the alternative Bitcoin currency.
 Timothy Lee, Washington Post writes that “nobody has built a turnkey Western Union alternative, but the emergence of Bitcoin ATMs is a first step toward low-cost international money transfers”.
Remittances form the second largest flow of money that circulates in developing countries; transfer fees charged by banks and payment systems take away a valuable amount.
A less discussed part of the argument is the role Bitcoin can play as a direct solution to the issue of remitted money (Joshua Brustin of Bloomberg).
 Bitcoin has low transaction feesA low-cost transaction system is appealing to many, and media discourse focuses on this aspect consistently.
 Unlike the huge amount of personal data required in any money transfer via banks or payment services, little is required and visible in Bitcoin transactions (just the numeric ID and the amount transferred).
Why is anonymity such a powerful argument in favor of Bitcoin? The idea of freedom of transaction and data privacy is strongly related to anonymity.
 With further coding, this could be technically achieved, he continues.
This only makes anonymity even more desirable: “a truly anonymous online currency is needed to make democracy safe” argued Richard Stallman of Free Software Foundation in an interview on RT.
 However, writers such as Kadhim Shubber of Wired UK warned it is not.
 Bitcoin is (pseudo)-anonymousBitcoin was believed to be fully anonymous.
 Nevertheless, the latter is now less focused on this argument, given recent hacks.
 Bitcoin websites initially boasted this argument and media discourse followed up on it.
This argument likely draws on the opinion of Bitcoin’s alleged inventor (Satoshi Nakamoto): with the weakened trust societies now have in banks, trusting algorithms instead could be an alternative.
” He is also cautious about the limits of this.
 Bitcoin is highly secure thanks to complicated cryptographic algorithmsSalmon Felix of Reuters  admits that “Bitcoins were designed to be – and, in many ways, are – the perfect digital currency: they’re frictionless, anonymous, and cryptographically astonishingly secure.
 This is applicable for production (anyone can join the mining of the currency – this shifts the existing government production of money to the crowd itself) as well as for transaction (which is peer-to-peer, regardless of physical boundaries, financial access or political restrictions).
Bitcoin’s essential elements, both technologically and conceptually speaking, are its network structures that lay outside the mainstream framework of bank services and state regulation.
 He also points out how it is somewhat symptomatic that countries in financial and political crisis have been eager to adopt it at a faster pace than others, like in the famous example of Cyprus.
 Bitcoin’s network of production and transaction is independent of bank and state intervention“The emergence of Bitcoin confirms that money need not be created by government “, John Gray of BBC  notes.
7 Common arguments in favor of Bitcoin:1.
Let’s tackle the pros first; another blog post on the cons will follow soon.
 What’s more, mining through articles published in The Guardian, Reuters, Forbes, Wired, BBC, Ars Technica, Al Jazeera and the likes, I’ve noticed that some central arguments are used bidirectional.
Arguments both in favor and against the currency tend to be repeated across the board.
Beyond the usual description of Bitcoin most seem to agree on – that is, a crypto-currency, with which users can transact (pseudo) anonymously in a decentralized, P2P network at zero or low fees – perspectives on Bitcoin’s functionality and feasibility are conflicting.
Over the past two years, Bitcoin is actively debated in diverse narratives and journalistic outlets.
Narratives do change as events unfold; I look forward to see very different discourses in the coming months and perhaps more reflections on what has been unraveled so far.
 They contribute to the media narratives that outline Bitcoin’s contradictory nature – almost all of its characteristics invite for different, often conflicting implications.
com; data from Risto PietiläIn conclusion, some of these commonly used arguments, either in favor or against, are often double-edged.
 Bitcoin ownership distribution – credits to Rob Wile from businessinsider.
 Recent statistics on Bitcoin distribution among different users is worrisome: 927 people own half of all Bitcoins.
 How does it then differ from usual internet banking ? With a friendly interface anyone can transact but the financial mechanisms remain known only in selected circles – are thus programmers the new economists?Further egalitarian issues surface, as Benjamin Wallace of Wired points out: there is a segmentation between the users: aristocracy (early adopters of Bitcoins, who own more because they were mining from the beginning) and poor (newcomers, who buy a Bitcoin at many times the value it initially had).
 While payment itself can be relatively easy, understanding how it works requires tech knowledge.
Bitcoin is often presented as pertaining to a geek world of savvy programmers and tech entrepreneurs.
 Bitcoin is not for everyone.
 However, with its limit of 21 million, it’s hard to see Bitcoin as ‘the new money’ – that would imply a change in status and either a compliance with the state or negation of the latter.
 As a complementary currency, it could work, because it will not take up the big task that money has now – a translator for all financial transactions, a relationship with the state.
I would argue that the success of Bitcoin as a global currency depends on the status it aims to achieve.
 Steve Faktor of Forbes enumerates technical complexity, marginal legality, deflationary nature and lack of interest in the general audience as main problems.
 Bitcoin cannot succeed as a global currencyYanis Varoufakis makes a claim that “there can be no de-politicised currency capable of ‘powering’ an advanced, industrial society”.
Contrary to some opinions on the currency’s anonymity, recent examples argue that tracing down one’s identity is possible.
 Under these circumstances, users rely on face to face meeting for exchanging the first purely virtual currency.
 This is a first change of policy as a result of legal pressures for compliance with financial regulations.
 Bitcoin exposes the identity of usersAndy Greenber of Forbes questioned the process via which one can buy and sell Bitcoins, pointing out that exchange platforms now require users to provide valid ID.
 Stephen Mihm from Bloomberg questioned whether Bitcoins value itself relies on its use on dark markets.
 It’s used for illegal purposesDecentralization and anonymity come with freedom of transaction but also with the price of hidden markets such as the recently closed Silk Road or the emerging Assassination Market.
I would argue that this is also partially a result of the deflationary nature of Bitcoin; while it is intelligently designed to avoid the current inflation issues that real money is facing, the downside is that Bitcoins can become very valuable if speculation is growing.
 This might be the case, as points out a study published on Ars Technica a year ago: 78% of all Bitcoins are kept under their  owners’ digital mattresses.
Instead of acting as a medium of exchange, Bitcoins can be regarded as investment opportunities.
 “Such volatility makes it useless as means to do transactions” warns the founder of Forbes, while Timothy Lee, Washington Post  concludes that “whatever virtues Bitcoin has, stability of value is clearly not one of them.
The value of Bitcoins was a few dollars last year, now it has soared to over $1,000.
 Its price instability makes it behave as a commodity rather than medium of exchange.
 Freedom of transaction comes with responsibility, yet how can users put up with it when understanding Bitcoin requires significant technological know-how?3.
 This becomes further relevant as no entity ensures against hacks.
 This is partly a result of Bitcoin’s open source code, available to anyone, including hackers who can figure ways to get hold of accounts and transactions.
I would argue that algorithms cannot guarantee in practice as much as is promised in theory.
 Arguably, the software’s lack of trust from the people backfires.
comThere are some ventures offering BitBills or BitCards as new ways of stacking the currency if one does not rely on the network.
History of Bitcoin’s development, including security breaches in 2011 – wired.
In other words, cryptography is a human artifact and thus, not without its faults.
 Bitcoin is subject to hacking threatsWriters such as John Gray of the BBC warn that  “a virtual currency can’t escape the dangers of actual societies”, while authors such as Tim Worstall from Forbes went as far as blaming security issues for the currency’s extinction.
 It also leaves space for restrictions, such as the recent removal of several Bitcoin apps from Apple’s App Store, on the premise of  financial transaction facilitation.
 This leaves plenty of space for speculation, with its value in real money fluctuating abruptly.
 Is then its current adoption enough to give it legitimacy for a wider audience? Would state regulation encourage a wider adoption of Bitcoin or would it destroy its very conceptual meaning and purpose as an independent currency?Meanwhile, Bitcoin is in a legal gray area.
 This is also the case in Bitcoin.
 Currencies have circulated long before the emergence of the state and continued to do so as complementary currency while state minted-money became official, but always in informal networks of trade.
 Bitcoin is currency, not money.
 Money IS the creation of the state.
 It’s the essential debate of currency versus money in contemporary times.
”I think the question of legitimacy is of primary importance in the Bitcoin debate, and is not thoroughly analyzed.
 Money is inevitably a tool of the state.
Edward Hadas of Reuters notes: “money that is not issued by governments is always doomed to failure.
 Bitcoins are not serious money as they have no legal tenderBitcoin’s disruptive and independent model does raise valid questions in regards to its legitimacy, user protection and trade ethics.
Follow-up to the previous post on “7 Common arguments in favor of Bitcoins” in diverse media discourses, this post is dedicated to the other side of the (bit)coin: 7 most common arguments against it.
 This year, join the wider community at their own space and discuss the future of money & alternatives.
 At last year’s INC conference Unlike Us, a couple of TechInc members held an exciting hackaton on social networks and design.

Where?
Technologia Incognita – Amsterdam Hackers Space – Louwesweg 1 (directions here)TechInc is an independent & financially self-sustainable community of 100 hackers & artists, located in Amsterdam in an art incubator.

When?
Sunday, March 23 after 4 p.
What?
An invitation to attend their hack & research space for drinks & discussions on coining alternatives & hacking society.
For MoneyLab attendees & interested folks,The hacking community at TechInc (Technologia Incognita) have a wonderful proposal for ending the MoneyLab event.
 With the the growing  list of conferences about Bitcoins and meetups next year, locally and globally, it would be interesting to observe to which extent the discourse gets more critical, structured and reflexive, and the audience more diverse.
 Joerg Platzer’s face-to-face meetings with restaurant and pub owners in Kreuzberg is an organic strategy to encourage common businesses and their clients to engage with Bitcoin, yet how would a wider communication strategy look like?With an abundance of speakers actively involved in programming and handling the Bitcoin economy, what was missed overall was a more reflective, research-oriented perspective.
 With most presentations focusing on tech development and the business innovation side of Bitcoin infrastructure, few speakers discussed how the currency and its model should be communicated outside the tech and entrepreneur-savvy communities.
Finally, the third questioned relationship is with the potential users of Bitcoin.
The second questioned relationship is with traditional economic theories; Peter Surda offered an overview of current myths that economists attribute to Bitcoin, which is uploaded here.
 An analogical situation might be considered that of the early days of the internet: with the highly disruptive idea of a chaotic and virtual space, the lack of regulation allowed for the full and ongoing development of what Internet is today.
 While arguably the use of Bitcoins within illegal exchange platforms such as the recently closed down Silk Road raise immediate arguments pro regulation, regulation might also affect the overall development of the currency, especially when it is adopted by innovative start-us, NGOs and online communities in general.
 Yet how would regulation affect Bitcoin overall? Mihai Alisie focused on the negative consequences of regulating an emerging and highly experimental currency, as it will limit and possibly drown its huge potential too early.
 However, Bitcoins used as commercial money could enter a different, taxable legal scheme.
 Bitcoin as private money and in the context of purely P2P transfers should not pose legal threats to individuals, albeit in Germany as in The Netherlands a VAT applies.
 He explained that it is the use of Bitcoin that dictates when and what regulation applies.
The first questioned relationship is with legitimacy: how does the new model evolve in the currently regulated market? Mirko Sprengnether, a German Attorney at Law, offered a balanced and informed account of when and why Bitcoin interferes with laws.
 He also pose the important question of how could more and more people adopt alternative currencies and open transaction systems and what implications will that have?All in all, the conference clearly outlined how discourse around Bitcoin as currency has evolved to discourse around Bitcoin as an alternative revenue model altogether.
On a more conceptual level, Johan Gevers from Monetas looked at the four pillars of a decentralized society – decentralized communication, production, exchange and law – encouraging the audience to envision how would decentralized societies would look like.
me – another way of rethinking community platforms of exchange (the likes of eBays or Marktplaats) as decentralized, P2P and with Bitcoin-payment.
  Mihai Alisie, founder of Bitcoin Magazine, discussed his soon-to-launch platform egora.
 The other project he is involved with Crypto Charity, is a new crowdfunding model combining Bitcoins and micropayments for fundraising.
 Platzer reported that more and more restaurants and pubs in Berlin are opening up their tellers to Bitcoins.
  Joerg Platzer, Bitcoin Foundation Director and owner of Room 77, the first business to accept Bitcoins in Berlin’s Kreuzberg, discussed ways to communicate or rather, market Bitcoin as a good proposition for merchants and buyers alike.
 Further on, Celso Pitta talked about how his company, BTCJam, allows anonymous loans and P2P lending.
 The larger implications of this is that users can transfer these colored Bitcoins as their own currency (for example, one company assigning a particular color to their Bitcoins and selling them as shares).
 Bitcoins could technically be assigned a color in order for them to more easily represent the purpose they serve (are the Bitcoins one transfers to someone else for a physical asset, like buying a car? Or are they bonds / shares within a company?) .
 Pragmatic solutions included that of Meni Rosenfeld, who discussed the possibility of colored Bitcoins.
 With this in mind, the focus of many speakers was on the importance of bringing back the freedom of transaction to individuals, communities and organizations.
 Another topic of concern – and perhaps relevant to many small and medium sized businesses everywhere –  is the difficulty in getting the loans or fundraising support to launch themselves in the first place.
 Another problem addressed are the areas where banking systems are unavailable and global payment methods don’t offer their services; as a result, alternative payments such as mobile money (in Africa specifically) are an emerging market.
One particular problem seems to be that of remittances – the flow of money circulating from foreign workers to their home countries –  which are often subject to high transfer fees and huge delays.
 A critique of existing financial systems and banking practices was accompanied by ways in which Bitcoin can provide solutions to some serious gaps and limitations.
The technological opportunities of Bitcoin should address society needs – this was yet another key note of the conference.
  Right now, advertisements done via Anonymous Ads are mostly for gambling and digital goods.
 As an alternative advertising model, it would be interesting to see how the Anonymous Ads could become a good business proposition for advertisers, while protecting the privacy of their target.
 Google Ads services are known for the huge amount of analytics and extensive user behavior monitoring.
 Unlike Google Ads, the websites visitors’ privacy is respected in as much as the only considered metrics are impressions, banner clicks and conversions.
 Picking on the Google Ads functionality, Anonymous Ads allows advertisers to place online banners on websites and pay the website owner for banner impressions with Bitcoins.
  Another interesting project is Anonymous Ads.
 TransferGo is just one example of how you can send money and Bitcoins to anyone in the world at low fee rates.
 Bits of Proof allows for a similar opportunity, but adds Bobshop mobile app to their services.
 BitPay is a start-up that helps businesses integrate Bitcoin as payment method on their web-shops.
 Furthermore, businesses can create and organize their own, jurisdiction-less financial systems (for example using Bitcoins as payment method for their products and services but also as an internal labor remuneration).
 The library lists software for people to send remittances at very low costs, create their own digital currencies or wire money without needing a bank account.
 Monetas is an open transactions library that offers open source software; with it, individuals, communities and start-ups can rethink many of the traditional business models, with a more ethical, open approach.
 How do these new, open source and decentralized networks propose an alternative financial system altogether, not just for individuals but for businesses too?Several start-ups and non-profits present at the conference tackle this question directly.
  Being a technology, it is relevant to look at the structures supporting the currency.
 This is what Bitcoin Magazine founder Mihai Alisie stated in his key-note address and it was the underlying subject for most of the discussions.
Bitcoin is more than a currency, it is a technology.
The European Bitcoin Conference (Amsterdam 26-28th of September) aimed to address a more or less complete spectrum of perspectives on the digital currency by inviting tech, legal, economical and entrepreneurial experts and innovators.
 The Bitcoin Europe conference, on another hand, gave good pulse of what the developments and key concerns are at the moment.
 Academia is still sketching a clear, structural approach on the topic.
Media discourse about Bitcoin is live, abundant and hectic.
A review of the European Bitcoin Conference, Amsterdam 26-28th of September 2013.
  Sage Publications – Media, Culture and Society (2012): 725 – 743.
 ” Crowdsourcing and outsourcing: the impact of online funding and distribution on the documentary film industry in the UK”.
 We are looking forward to your suggestions and resources on the topic! Bibliography:Sørensen, Inge Ejbye .
Where then, asks Sørensen, lie the new “aesthetic and editorial” authorities? What are the crowd’s criteria for validation and  are they enabling new documentary makers to affirm themselves, or is rather that previously-earned prestige and credibility of established names that get funded anyway ? Instead of polarizing the type of documentaries and their budgets, how could traditional funding sources like broadcasters and festivals collaborate with the alternatives?It would be interesting to see how similar concerns find their place in other countries, where documentary industries have witnessed different traditional funding scheme.
 Some platforms, such as  People for Cinema (now part of Ulule), have seen online funded productions competing for festival awards the likes of Cannes.
 At the same time, their very participation in the festival strengthens their prestige in front of the audience.
 When crowfunded documentary makers speak about their successful campaigns at film festivals, as Sørensen details, they appeal to a new form of social capital – support of the crowd, of the new safeguard and vower of quality.
 Whereas normally it is big broadcasters and cinema festivals that are deeply embedded in the mindset of the audience as vowers of artistic value and safeguards of quality knowledge (and thus, offering the documentaries the much needed social capital to appeal to the audience), it is relevant to analyze where the new authority and social capital resides on crowdfunding platforms and P2P online distribution channels.
 Notions like trust, credibility, impartiality and high quality are just as vital in these alternative funding schemes.
 Interestingly, these refer mostly to the prestige of the filmmakers, their strong networks (that can financially contribute) and an appealing topic.
Furthermore, Sørensen argues ,there are some factors that can determine success in online funding.
 Hence, coins the author, the resulting polarization of both budgets and type of productions that is being made by the two models of financing.
 While it’s an open space for all creatives, reality shows  that particular productions like long-term and/or high cost productions (preferred by broadcasters) are not really fit for succeeding on the alternative model.
 While these come with financial rewards, opportunity of engaging audiences and editorial independence, the role of the artist slides to new, unforeseen responsibilities (“documentary-maker, PR person, sales-woman, fundraiser, public speaker and distributor”)(Sørensen, 738).
In this context, it is the no-to-low budget documentaries particularly that migrate to crowdsourcing, crowd investment and P2P online distribution as  alternatives.
 Therefore, argues Sørensen, this has effective implications in what type of productions are being supported: long term (series and episodes), big budgets (that can be satisfied by a handful of strong sponsors), suitable topics (“the broadcaster’s commissioning  editor will typically also act as an executive producer and potentially have a significant say in the editorial of the film”)(Sørensen, 737),  often involving celebrities and a first-person narrative style.
 Its characteristic as a one-time screening event doesn’t fit the advertising model of returning visitors, which drama episodes fulfill, nor does its ethics allow products placements.
While another justification for this could also be the reduced production costs of documentaries (which now have much lighter and technologically-capable equipment, which also ” allows one person to the job of many”), in reality the airing of a documentary brings less return of investment than other type of programmes (like drama or entertainment).
 With the private sponsor’s advertising budgets moving to online audiences, there have been yearly cuts in funding for factual programming and documentaries on TV.
 Nevertheless, points out the author, these broadcasting entities are public, and therefore commercially-sponsored (an interesting and ironic model itself).
 Unlike in many European countries, where a single documentary can receive money from a wide range of public and private sources,  in UK’s particular model it is a broadcaster that (fully) funds it.
Broadcasters, details Sørensen, have been and are major decision makers in the documentary industry in the UK.
 The trend of migrating from UK’s traditional funding model of the broadcaster as commissioner, funder and distributor  to that of the filmmakers’ own crowdfunding, crowd investment and online distribution networks is not just a shift in revenue model, argues Sørensen – it’s most importantly, albeit less visible, about the cultural and creative shifts.
Her article Crowdsourcing and outsourcing: the impact of online funding and distribution on the documentary film industry in the UK is a clear, thorough and insightful discourse at many levels.
 She is currently at the  Centre for Cultural Policy Research (University of Glasgow, UK), where she analyzes the micro dynamics of the individual documentary-makers (content, aesthetics, experience with the digitization shift and its implications) as well as macro dynamics of the whole industry (production process, distribution networks, alternative finance schemes like crowdfunding, and cultural changes).
 This creative industry is also her research area as an academic.
Inge Ejbye Sørensen has worked for more than a decade as an award winning documentary-maker for the major 4 TV broadcasters in the UK (BBC, Channel 4, Five and STV).
 All in all, a move towards an open source model of crowdfunding, rather than a proprietary and financialized one.
Possible ways to shift from social networks monetization to a real wealth redistribution
Ridgway proposes a couple of ideas, including a creative commons license for the crowdfunded projects and complementing crowdfunding with crowdsourcing.
What questions arise here?Is it possible to discuss a distribution of wealth when studies show that 75% of donors/investors come from one’s immediate (social) network?Is crowdfunding currently an ethical model, given that most labour and time goes unpaid? Would it be sustainable financially if that changed?What other financial models for arts and culture could we envisage, apart from the long-standing patronage model that, with crowdfunding, has merely shifted to the crowds rather than being the privilege of the wealthy?Are policy-making and culture authorities making a well documented move in encouraging crowdfunding, given the little understood dynamics of this financial model and its obvious shortcomings? A recent questionnaire by the European Commission, that asks creative workers for their feedback, opinions and suggestions on crowdfunding, might reveal further insights in what the next step will be.
 In some cases, there have been funds displaced for training cultural workers in approaching crowdfunding.
Politics-wise, Ridgway points out crowdfunding has received substantial attention from EU and national cultural commissions.
 Coupling these expenses with the ones for promised rewards, the end result is that way less money goes into the project itself, and more often than not the campaigners are not paid at all.
 They further pay the crowdfunding platform fees from 5% to as much as 15% of the whole sum, as well as significant fees to payment service providers for each donation or investment.
 On the other side, people crowdfunding are taxed on their raised amount as if it were income.
 For example, citizens pay the same amount of taxes to the state (a percentage of which goes to arts and culture) but are concomitantly asked to financially support crowdfunded projects.
There are legal aspects to crowdfunding as well.
 Thus, the distribution of wealth brought about by crowdfunding seems to favour certain industries.
 Artistic creativity seems embedded in the new “creative projects” perspective that favours areas like gaming and design, which make good investments and open new, profitable markets.
 Art practices like performances or documentary-making are often highly disruptive and experimental, but Ridgway also argues that this very attribute exposes them to crowdfunding failure.
The notion of “value” becomes problematic as we are discussing two meanings of the term that now intertwine: the artistic value and its monetization in donations and rewards.
 The anonymous and neutral medium of money commodifies relationships and installs indebtedness, as others expect similar support for their own crowdfunding campaigns.
 Crowdfunding does more than asking for support or attention – it asks for money.
 When discussing these relations (including those maintained via Facebook), they rely on broad, personal exchange mechanisms (networking, communication, gift, bartering etc).
 Social relations are directly affected.
 This is why campaigners rely on their own social network, but not without consequences.
 There is furthermore a promise of wealth in crowdfunding that simply doesn’t match the reality: there aren’t enough private donors for all projects.
In her article, she deals with a number of problematic aspects of crowdfunding that make her point about the latter argument:Some of the ethical concerns she lays down are the dangerous rhetorics of successful campaigns that overshadow the unpaid time, effort and expertise that crowdfunders are required to put in the campaign.
 Ridgway thus contests the claim that crowdfunding as a financial model leads to a redistribution of wealth and argues instead that it merely monetizes and commodifies one’s very own social relations.
 While social media have formerly been the place of an attention economy, Ridgway argues they have also become a monetization space: crowdfunders often share their campaigns on social media, asking for money from friends, family, co-workers, in other words their immediate networks.
 As such, arts and culture sector have witnessed a re-branding under the “creative industries” umbrella and are using both digital payments and networks to support themselves in a competitive, neo-liberal environment, much like any other business.
 The third is the existence of highly network platforms the likes of Facebook or Twitter.
 The second was the rise of digital payments that allow private micro-donations.
 The first is the withdrawal of the state public funds for culture, fueled by economic crisis.
 Is crowdfunding a new model for distributing wealth or does the process lead to monetization and commodification of one’s social relations instead?The context of these inquiries has several pillars.
In discussing crowdfunding for arts and culture specifically, these are the two essential questions, argues Ridgway.
 On the other hand, in A peer-reviewed journal about…, the title of the article tackles the other side of the coin: “Crowdfunding or funding the crowds: a new model for the distribution of wealth?”.
 Given that 75% of that crowd statistically consists of one’s personal social network, things become problematic.
 In Data Browser 05: Disrupting Business, it takes disguise as the question of “Crowdfunding – monetizing the crowd?”.
 She recently published an incisive article on crowdfunding that goes under two different titles.
Renee Ridgway is an Amsterdam-based artist, freelance curator and writer.
data-browser.
 Previous books can be explored, acquired or downloaded on www.
net/05Contributors:
Saul Albert | Christian Ulrik Andersen | Franco Bifo Berardi | Heath Bunting | Paolo Cirio | Baruch Gottlieb | Brian Holmes | Dmytri Kleiner | Geert Lovink | Georgios Papadopolous | Soeren Pold | Oliver Ressler | Kate Rich | Renée Ridgway | Guido Segni | Stevphen Shukaitis | Nathaniel Tkacz | Marina VishmidtEdited by Tatiana Bazzichelli & Geoff CoxThe DATA browser series of books explores issues at the intersection of art, technology and cultural politics.
data-browser.
Further information, including contents, order or download possibilities (the later is for free), visit www.
 In a perverse way, we ask whether this presents new opportunities for cultural producers to achieve more autonomy over their production process? If it is indeed possible or desirable, what alternative business models emerge? The book is concerned broadly with business as (artistic) material for reinvention, including critical writing and examples of art/activist projects.
With a backdrop of the crisis of financial capitalism, austerity cuts in the cultural sphere, the idea is to focus on potential art strategies in relation to a broken economy.
The book represents the 5th and latest release of the DATA Browser series and tackles the interconnections between art, activism and the business concept of disruptive innovation.
*For a more qualitative analysis of crowdfunding dynamics in terms of success factors, Ethan Mollick’s paper on ‘The Dynamics of Crowdfunding: an Exploratory Study is a good read.
 It will also help them identify the most suitable  crowfunding platform for their project, according to relevant criteria for them, as well as in-depth analysis of a wide range of platform dynamics.
One of the pillars of the MoneyLab project is build a toolkit that would help guide creatives in approaching, understanding and deciding if crowdfunding is a model they want to invest time and effort in.
 It becomes more and more important to leave the hype of crowdfunding aside and look at the model with a more critical, inquiring mindset.
 For the latter, it would be specifically interesting to determine if and how funders belong to the immediate network of the fundraisers or were previously unfamiliar to them (Renee Ridgway points out that 75% of the funders belong to the campaigners’ network and only 25% are actually new and distant contributors – does then  the size of one’s network play a role in the project’s success?)*.
 Insights in average donation/project or average number of funders/ project would give an idea of how to focus on rewards value and what the reach should be in terms of audience.
New York Times’ visualization does a good job in shedding light into some economical dynamics behind the platforms, and opens up more inquiries, many of which, if answered, would be highly relevant for future crowdfunders.
 Perhaps a differentiation between “live”and “successful” projects would have been useful, as it is unclear how many projects have ended and uncertain how many of the live ones will ever succeed.
The visualization could benefit from a more clear methodology explanation (how is average calculated? Does ‘average financing’ refer to the average budget set up by the makers or the actual sum pledged for them – this is a significant difference as some projects end up with more than they intended).
 Interestingly, the average budget of successful projects s is always higher (sometimes as twice) than the average of all project budgets (successful and unsuccessful combined) within a particular category.
 This  gives a good insight in the limits of the  budgets that are successful in the according category.
 Generally, budgets do no stray too much from the average, with hundred thousand or million dollar projects being a very rare case.
 The average requested financing is $8,000  (for films) and $5,000  (for music) – whereas a gaming project takes in over $29,000 on average – nearly 4 or 5 times more! Technology projects have similar big budgets with only 357 projects running or successful.
 The visualization shows, for example, that the majority of the projects are in the ‘Film/Video’ and ‘Music’ categories ( over 7,000  – almost 9 times more than the number of projects in ‘Game’).
 Then it continues to analyze the running and successful projects, according to categories.
 It starts by pointing out that only half of the projects were successful (April 2009 – April 2012).
The visualization is revealing some interesting aspects.
 Already one year since its publishing, “Three years of Kickstarter” is still one of the few investigations ( if not the only one terms of visualization) that point out meaningful data about financing dynamics of crowdfunding platforms like Kickstarter.
The New York Times did a well-executed research on this topic, which was translated into a data visualization.
An essential element that is missing is therefore a different insight in the dynamics of the crowd-funding platforms.
 Most commonly it’s about the total amount raised by all projects, or the total amount of funders – nor particularly helpful for the next crowdfunder.
  Some platforms publish statistics, but in a de-contextualized matter, where no opportunity for useful interpretation is made possible.
 While one form of guidance exists on some crowd-funding platforms, it’s mostly as ‘tips and tricks’ to make it happen.
Nevertheless, building a successful campaign can be as challenging and time consuming as applying at an other type of funds, whether private or public.
 The hype around this movement is generated by success stories of projects raising hundreds of thousands of euros, as well as the growing number of crowdfunding platforms on a local and international level.
Creative and community projects turn to crowdfunding as a promising model of financing.
org/mailman/listinfo/moneylab_listcultures.
To subscribe to the mailinglist:  http://listcultures.
 Did you read or write an interesting article on this matter, or maybe you also want to host a similar conference, hackathon or other types of conspiratorial gatherings?  – let us know, and join our mailinglist.
>>Join Us!<< Of central importance to this project is the formation of a collaborative network of researchers, artists, developers, engineers, and others interested in sharing, coining, critiquing, and ushering in alternative network economies.
MoneyLab: Toolkit In addition, we will develop a toolkit built on the results of our research project that maps the field of alternative revenue models and payments systems geared towards freelancers and organizations in the creative industries.
This publication is due to come late 2014 and will be published both in a paper version in a variety of electronic versions (pdf, e-pub etc.
MoneyLab: Conference Reader One of the intended outcomes of the conference will be to publish the discussions and debates as an INC reader, which will serve as a resource on alternatives in networked economies.
 The aim will be to map the field, reflect upon theories and experiences and clarify the key constituents, discourses and architectures at work in the different kinds of network economies.
 The purpose of this conference is to launch the network by gathering artists, designers, programmers, activists and researchers.
MoneyLab: Conference We will be hosting a two-day conference event in Amsterdam, on March 21-22, 2014.
 We will send out a notice to our listservice members as soon as the Blog is live.
orgMoneyLab: Blog Over the next few weeks we will launch the MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives Blog where you can find our position paper, interesting background articles, blog posts, and info on our upcoming events.
org/mailman/listinfo/moneylab_listcultures.
http://listcultures.
 We are always looking for radical submissions that closely reflect the stated aim of the MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives project.
What’s Cooking?MoneyLab: Discussion List You can join our project by subscribing to the MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives Mailinglist.
It is not enough to merely promote and further develop (technical) alternatives, we also need time to ask ourselves critical questions and re-examine the very underpinnings of our endeavors.
 Is this where a healthy economic future lies? Do these economic ventures testify to a paradigm shift from a market-based economy towards a network economy? What are the possibilities, pitfalls and issues at hand? Will these experiments gain wider ‘over the counter’ usage, effectively becoming mainstream? Beyond Hayekian notions of ‘currency competition’, what theories and concepts can help us engage with these developments?MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives aims to critically explore, map and probe the politics, inner-workings and governance of these alternative digital-economic forms.
 These coincide with the huge growth of mobile money transfer services across Asia and Africa and the general convergence of digital and financial industries.
 Online bartering sites, a plethora of crowdfunding platforms, new forms of valuation, e-wallets and crypto-currencies like Bitcoin, are but a few examples.
Over the past few years, while the economic downturn endures and budget cuts prevail, we have witnessed the emergence and rise of alternative payment systems and revenue models in digital media.